As Covid-19 vaccine development picks up pace, the Philippines has drawn up an immunization plan. The bottom line, officials say: Getting doses to enough of the population to rein in the virus will take two to five years.

That is the forecast for reaching the target of 60 million to 70 million of the country’s nearly 110 million people, they say, using a patchwork of vaccines from different suppliers. So far the Philippines has struck just one vaccine deal, for 2.6 million shots—enough for 1.3 million people.

Manila’s early blueprint is a reality check for those expecting a swift vaccine-driven end to the pandemic and revival of global trade and travel. While some countries may be able to get shots to large portions of their populations in 2021, some in the developing world may be years away from protecting more than their highest-risk populations.

That means the virus will continue to circulate and claim lives in various corners of the map. Some global health specialists worry about a future in which the coronavirus lurks in such places, becoming endemic—and perhaps evolving in ways that make current vaccines less effective.

“There’s no point having products that do not reach the majority of the world’s population,” said Soumya Swaminathan, chief scientist of the World Health Organization. She cited the hepatitis B vaccine, saying it took 30 years after its introduction in rich countries to reach low- and middle-income countries.

Only one disease—smallpox—has ever been eradicated from the human population using a vaccine.

For countries like the Philippines, the challenge of procuring the vaccine from the limited supply and financing the purchase is just the start: They must then mount large, coordinated operations to get the shots to their far-flung populations. “Our battle with Covid-19 is going to be a long one,” Carlito Galvez Jr., who leads the country’s vaccine effort, said in late November.

In the U.S., the supply chief for the government-backed Operation Warp Speed vaccine initiative said shots could be available to all by June. In the Philippines, officials say it will take up to two years just to cover the approximately 35% of the population identified as high-risk or high-priority: groups like front-line health-care workers, government staff, senior citizens and people with existing medical conditions. Officials estimate they will be able to inoculate 25 to 35 million people a year.

The Philippines, which is suffering one of the worst outbreaks in Southeast Asia, lags behind in signing advance purchase agreements. Months of talks with 17 companies from seven countries have yielded just one agreement, the 2.6 million-dose deal with AstraZeneca.

The United Nations-backed Covax initiative aims to secure enough vaccines for countries’ highest-risk 20%. Going beyond that benchmark will be especially hard for places like the Philippines. It lacks vaccine-production capacity and has no domestic vaccine candidate in development, and without locking in deals, it may have to wait for deliveries in relatively small batches from multiple suppliers.

Governments have reserved about 9.8 billion doses in deals with drugmakers, with 3.9 billion bound for high-income countries, according to an analysis of procurement data by the Duke Global Health Innovation Center. It cited models showing insufficient supplies to meet global demand until 2023 or 2024.

Philippines vaccine chief Mr. Galvez said last week that more orders are on the horizon. Lawmakers passed a bill waiving a requirement for years of advance-stage trials, and President Rodrigo Duterte this month empowered the country’s Food and Drug Administration to issue emergency-use authorizations that will slash approval time.

Mr. Galvez said he expects the Philippines to secure about 10 million to 20 million doses from each of some half-dozen drugmakers from the U.S., U.K., China, India and Russia, on course for a total of 50 million to 60 million doses by the end of 2021.

Once the shots are in hand, the public health-care system must overcome obstacles that have stymied past vaccination programs. One high hurdle is transportation: The Philippines is an archipelago, with many people living in remote villages.

In the past supplies have often expired before they could be administered, said Dr. Charles Yu, vice chancellor for research at the De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute in Manila. Some Covid-19 vaccines need to be kept at extremely low temperatures that will require custom-built cold-chain storage and transport facilities.

For decades, the Philippines has fared worse on immunization than many of its neighbors. World Health Organization data shows it falling far short of the targets for some of the most ubiquitous vaccines. As of 2019, only 11% of the country’s administrative districts had reached the 80% coverage recommended to achieve herd immunity for diphtheria, and just 2% had reached the 95% coverage recommended for measles.

According to the Philippines’ Department of Health, 66% of infants had received all basic recommended vaccines in 2018, down from about 86% in 2010. Experts attribute this in part to wavering public confidence following a vaccine-program debacle in 2017. The government stopped administering Sanofi Pasteur’s dengue-fever vaccine, Dengvaxia, to schoolchildren after the company said it could put some recipients at higher risk.

“After Dengvaxia, measles went up, and polio, which was virtually eradicated, returned with a vengeance,” said Dr. Yu of the De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute. “Confidence is not very high, but fear of the vaccine may be overcome by fear of this virus and what it’s done to people’s lives.”