The drug maker Pfizer said on Wednesday that its coronavirus vaccine was 95 percent effective and had no serious side effects — the first set of complete results from a late-stage vaccine trial as Covid-19 cases skyrocket around the globe.

The data showed that the vaccine prevented mild and severe forms of Covid-19, the company said. And it was 94 percent effective in older adults, who are more vulnerable to developing severe Covid-19 and who do not respond strongly to some types of vaccines.

Pfizer, which developed the vaccine with its partner BioNTech, said the companies planned to apply to the Food and Drug Administration for emergency authorization “within days,” raising hopes that a working vaccine could soon become a reality.

The trial results — less than a year after researchers began working on the vaccine — shattered all speed records for vaccine development, a process that usually takes years.

“The study results mark an important step in this historic eight-month journey to bring forward a vaccine capable of helping to end this devastating pandemic,” Dr. Albert Bourla, Pfizer’s chief executive, said in a statement.

If the F.D.A. authorizes the two-dose vaccine, Pfizer has said that it could have up to 50 million doses available by the end of the year, and up to 1.3 billion by the end of next year.

However, only about half of its supply will go to the United States this year, or enough for about 12.5 million people — a sliver of the American population of 330 million. Americans will receive the vaccine for free, under a $1.95 billion deal the federal government reached with Pfizer for 100 million doses.

The results align with an early analysis that Pfizer and BioNTech reported last week, which found that the vaccine was more than 90 percent effective. Then on Monday, the drug maker Moderna reported that its vaccine was 94.5 percent effective in an early analysis.

Pfizer and BioNTech’s trial included nearly 44,000 volunteers, half of whom received the vaccine. The other half received a placebo shot of salt water. Then the researchers waited to see how many in each group developed Covid-19.

The companies said that out of 170 cases of Covid-19, 162 were in the placebo group, and eight were in the vaccine group. Out of 10 cases of severe Covid-19, nine had received a placebo.

Pfizer and BioNTech said that the vaccine’s efficacy was consistent across age, race and ethnicity. The most common serious adverse event was fatigue, with 3.7 percent of volunteers reporting tiredness after they took the second dose. Two percent of volunteers reported a headache after the second dose. Older adults reported fewer and milder side effects, the companies said.

“It’s pretty amazing,” said Akiko Iwasaki, an immunologist at Yale University. She said the results in people over 65 were the most promising. “We know from the influenza vaccine that it’s very difficult to achieve protection in this age group with vaccines,” she said, so 94 percent efficacy in that group “is really remarkable.”

Federal health officials have said the first doses of the vaccines will most likely go to groups like health care workers who are at high risk for exposure, as well as to people who are most vulnerable to the disease, such as older people.

Dr. Saad B. Omer, the director of the Yale Institute for Global Health, said the results showing the vaccines protected people from severe disease was also good news, because with such limited availability initially, the first goal will be not to stop transmission of the disease, but to prevent people from becoming extremely ill. “So that is very reassuring,” he said.

He called on Pfizer to quickly release a more detailed analysis of the data — beyond the initial news release — so that scientists could more thoroughly evaluate the results. The companies have said they plan to submit the results for review in a scientific journal, a process that can take weeks or months. “These are not normal times, this is a pandemic, and major policy is being made,” Dr. Omer said. “It’s always better to make policy on scientific data, not a press release.”

In addition to the results of its clinical trial, Pfizer said it was ready to submit to the F.D.A. two months of safety data that the agency had recommended, as well as detailed manufacturing records showing the company can consistently produce high-quality batches of its product. The F.D.A. will review the data and ask an outside panel of vaccine experts to weigh in on the application, a process that could take weeks.

Both Pfizer and Moderna have said the accelerating pace of the pandemic has had the silver lining of speeding up their trials, since volunteers are becoming infected with the virus more quickly.

Pfizer and Moderna have developed vaccines that use a new technology that has never before been approved for human use. Both use a synthetic version of coronavirus genetic material, called mRNA, to program a person’s cells to churn out many copies of a fragment of the virus. That fragment sets off alarms in the immune system and stimulates it to attack if the person is exposed to the real virus.

If the vaccine is authorized, attention will immediately shift to how it will be distributed. The vaccine must be stored at minus 94 degrees Fahrenheit, colder than any other vaccine in development. Pfizer will ship the vaccine in special boxes of 1,000 to 5,000 doses that are stuffed with dry ice and equipped with GPS-enabled sensors. Pfizer’s vaccine can be stored in conventional freezers for up to five days, or in the special coolers for up to 15 days, as long as the dry ice is replenished and the boxes are not opened more than twice a day.

Moderna’s vaccine must also be stored in a freezer long-term, but at minus 4 degrees Fahrenheit. The company said on Monday that its vaccine could be stored at standard refrigerator temperatures of 36 to 46 degrees Fahrenheit for up to 30 days, not seven as previously thought, which could make it easier to store than the Pfizer vaccine.

At this point, most of us have heard about allergic reactions to Covid-19 vaccines: the doctor in Boston who had to administer his EpiPen, the hospital worker in Alaska who had trouble breathing. But it’s not at all surprising that allergic reactions happen. What matters most is the severity and the rate at which they occur. And for the Covid vaccines, there’s no doubt that the value of vaccination outweighs the risk.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued updated guidance on administering the Covid vaccines on Dec. 19. The agency noted that a small number of people had experienced significant allergic reactions. The C.D.C. recommended that everyone who received a vaccine be observed for at least 15 minutes. Those with a history of severe allergic reactions to pretty much anything should be observed for 30 minutes.

Anaphylaxis — a potentially life-threatening allergic reaction — is nothing to be ignored. It’s most commonly associated with allergies to foods, like peanuts, or bee stings, and it’s the reason many people carry EpiPens. Often, immediate administration of epinephrine is the only thing that can prevent death.

Even so, an average of around 60 people die each year from hornet, wasp and bee stings and three times as many die from food allergies. When the C.D.C. updated its guidance, at least six out of hundreds of thousands of recipients had experienced a severe allergic reaction, but all of them recovered with treatment.

The news media has covered these reactions, and it’s understandable that the public would be concerned about the dangers of new medications, especially ones that were developed so quickly and under such enormous pressure.

But put those numbers in context: More than 2.1 million people in the United States have received a dose of a vaccine at this point. So far, according to reports, about 11 severe allergic reactions — representing about one in 190,000 doses administered — have been noted. This is still higher than the overall rate of anaphylaxis in vaccinations, at 1.3 per one million given, but that may be only because we are being much more careful about monitoring reactions at the moment.

Context also matters. About one in 10 Americans have reported an allergic reaction to penicillins. About one in 100, perhaps, have a true allergy to that class of drugs (I’m one of them). Between one in 2,500 and one in 5,000 experience anaphylaxis. But pediatricians like me dispense penicillin all the time, with minimal concerns. We do so because most allergic reactions are minor and serious ones can be managed, and because we believe that the benefits outweigh the harms.

Every potential bad outcome of a Covid vaccine should be weighed against the chance of getting sick or dying from the disease.

Using data from Indiana, which has conducted multiple statewide studies on the prevalence of Covid-19, colleagues from the I.U.P.U.I. Fairbanks School of Public Health and I calculated the disease’s infection fatality rate. We found that, for people 60 years and older who were not living in jails or nursing homes, Covid-19 killed about one in 58 of those infected. For people between the ages of 40 and 59, it was about one in 833, and for people younger than 40 it was about one in 10,000. For those who were not white, the fatality rate was more than three times that for whites.

While a vast majority of people who develop Covid-19 survive, more than 670,000 Americans have been hospitalized with the disease this year; scientists are still struggling to treat so-called long-haulers, who endure long-term effects of the disease. A recent study in JAMA Internal Medicine also showed that when the coronavirus is more prevalent in an area, outcomes worsen. Surges are occurring all over now.

Getting a vaccine appears to be orders of magnitude safer than getting infected with the virus.

In order for the crisis to end, we need herd immunity. The only way to reach that is to get most people immunized or infected. Based on the numbers above, the latter would be a tragedy. Scaring people unnecessarily away from the former would result in more infections, more deaths and more economic and societal hardship. We should definitely be transparent and plain about the risks and benefits of the vaccines, but we need to put numbers in context of the risks of Covid-19.

Vaccines aren’t perfect. In the coming weeks and months, we can expect to read about people who were immunized and got sick anyway. This won’t mean that the vaccine is a failure; it will simply show, as we already know, that the shots are not 100 percent effective.

Those of us who communicate about public health have too often failed to be clear during this pandemic. Many Americans wound up being confused about masks, tests and certainly in how we should think about risk. This has not only led to confusion. It likely also led to sickness and death. Let’s do better with vaccines. There’s a real chance we can stop this pandemic in 2021 if we get this right.

The front-runners in the vaccine race seem to be working far better than anyone expected: Pfizer and BioNTech announced this week that their vaccine had an efficacy rate of 95 percent. Moderna put the figure for its vaccine at 94.5 percent. In Russia, the makers of the Sputnik vaccine claimed their efficacy rate was over 90 percent.

“These are game changers,” said Dr. Gregory Poland, a vaccine researcher at the Mayo Clinic. “We were all expecting 50 to 70 percent.” Indeed, the Food and Drug Administration had said it would consider granting emergency approval for vaccines that showed just 50 percent efficacy.

From the headlines, you might well assume that these vaccines — which some people may receive in a matter of weeks — will protect 95 out of 100 people who get them. But that’s not actually what the trials have shown. Exactly how the vaccines perform out in the real world will depend on a lot of factors we just don’t have answers to yet — such as whether vaccinated people can get asymptomatic infections and how many people will get vaccinated.

Here’s what you need to know about the actual effectiveness of these vaccines.

What do the companies mean when they say their vaccines are 95 percent effective?
The fundamental logic behind today’s vaccine trials was worked out by statisticians over a century ago. Researchers vaccinate some people and give a placebo to others. They then wait for participants to get sick and look at how many of the illnesses came from each group.

In the case of Pfizer, for example, the company recruited 43,661 volunteers and waited for 170 people to come down with symptoms of Covid-19 and then get a positive test. Out of these 170, 162 had received a placebo shot, and just eight had received the real vaccine.

From these numbers, Pfizer’s researchers calculated the fraction of volunteers in each group who got sick. Both fractions were small, but the fraction of unvaccinated volunteers who got sick was much bigger than the fraction of vaccinated ones. The scientists then determined the relative difference between those two fractions. Scientists express that difference with a value they call efficacy. If there’s no difference between the vaccine and placebo groups, the efficacy is zero. If none of the sick people had been vaccinated, the efficacy is 100 percent.

A 95 percent efficacy is certainly compelling evidence that a vaccine works well. But that number doesn’t tell you what your chances are of becoming sick if you get vaccinated. And on its own, it also doesn’t say how well the vaccine will bring down Covid-19 across the United States.

What’s the difference between efficacy and effectiveness?
Efficacy and effectiveness are related to each other, but they’re not the same thing. And vaccine experts say it’s crucial not to mix them up. Efficacy is just a measurement made during a clinical trial. “Effectiveness is how well the vaccine works out in the real world,” said Naor Bar-Zeev, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

It’s possible that the effectiveness of coronavirus vaccines will match their impressive efficacy in clinical trials. But if previous vaccines are any guide, effectiveness may prove somewhat lower.

The mismatch comes about because the people who join clinical trials are not a perfect reflection of the population at large. Out in the real world, people may have a host of chronic health problems that could interfere with a vaccine’s protection, for example.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a long history of following the effectiveness of vaccines after they’re approved. On Thursday, the agency posted information on its website about its plans to study the effectiveness of coronavirus vaccines. It will find opportunities to compare the health of vaccinated people to others in their communities who have not received a vaccine.

What exactly are these vaccines effective at doing?
The clinical trials run by Pfizer and other companies were specifically designed to see whether vaccines protect people from getting sick from Covid-19. If volunteers developed symptoms like a fever or cough, they were then tested for the coronavirus.

But there’s abundant evidence that people can get infected with the coronavirus without ever showing symptoms. And so it’s possible that a number of people who got vaccinated in the clinical trials got infected, too, without ever realizing it. If those cases indeed exist, none of them are reflected in the 95 percent efficacy rate.

People who are asymptomatic can still spread the virus to others. Some studies suggest that they produce fewer viruses, making them less of a threat than infected people who go on to develop symptoms. But if people get vaccinated and then stop wearing masks and taking other safety measures, their chances of spreading the coronavirus to others could increase.

“You could get this paradoxical situation of things getting worse,” said Dr. Bar-Zeev.

Will these vaccines put a dent in the epidemic?
Vaccines don’t protect only the people who get them. Because they slow the spread of the virus, they can, over time, also drive down new infection rates and protect society as a whole.

Scientists call this broad form of effectiveness a vaccine’s impact. The smallpox vaccine had the greatest impact of all, driving the virus into oblivion in the 1970s. But even a vaccine with extremely high efficacy in clinical trials will have a small impact if only a few people end up getting it.

“Vaccines don’t save lives,” said A. David Paltiel, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health. “Vaccination programs save lives.”

On Thursday, Dr. Paltiel and his colleagues published a study in the journal Health Affairs in which they simulated the coming rollout of coronavirus vaccines. They modeled vaccines with efficacy rates ranging from high to low, but also considered how quickly and widely a vaccine could be distributed as the pandemic continues to rage.

The results, Dr. Paltiel said, were heartbreaking. He and his colleagues found that when it comes to cutting down on infections, hospitalizations and deaths, the deployment mattered just as much as the efficacy. The study left Dr. Paltiel worried that the United States has not done enough to prepare for the massive distribution of the vaccine in the months to come.

“Time is really running out,” he warned. “Infrastructure is going to contribute at least as much, if not more, than the vaccine itself to the success of the program.”

It’s been a very good month for Covid-19 vaccines. Last week, the Food and Drug Administration provided an emergency authorization for a vaccine produced by Pfizer-BioNTech. On Thursday, an advisory committee recommended authorizing a vaccine by Moderna, and the F.D.A. is expected to authorize it soon.

These vaccines are a triumph. In large-scale trials with tens of thousands of participants, both demonstrated around 95 percent efficacy in preventing Covid-19 — a stunning number exceeding our best hopes.

Both vaccines are supposed to be administered in two doses, a prime and a booster, 21 days apart for Pfizer and 28 days for Moderna. However, in data provided to the F.D.A., there are clues for a tantalizing possibility: that even a single dose may provide significant levels of protection against the disease.

If that’s shown to be the case, this would be a game changer, allowing us to vaccinate up to twice the number of people and greatly alleviating the suffering not just in the United States, but also in countries where vaccine shortages may take years to resolve.

But to get there — to test this possibility — we must act fast and must quickly acquire more data.

For both vaccines, the sharp drop in disease in the vaccinated group started about 10 to 14 days after the first dose, before receiving the second. Moderna reported the initial dose to be 92.1 percent efficacious in preventing Covid-19 starting two weeks after the initial shot, when the immune system effects from the vaccine kick in, before the second injection on the 28th day.

That raises the question of whether we should already be administrating only a single dose. But while the data is suggestive, it is also limited; important questions remain, and approval would require high standards and more trials.

First, the science. While the vaccine trials were designed to evaluate a two-dose regimen, some immunity might be acquired before a second dose is administered. We know, for instance, that a Covid-19 infection appears to yield protection for at least five to seven months. While infections are not vaccinations, and while we need more data on this, it’s plausible that the immunity gained from a vaccination may turn out to be even stronger than what comes from an infection. The reason we do a second — booster — vaccination is that these later doses help to solidify immune memory, in part by giving extra training to the cells that produce antibodies, a process called affinity maturation. But this process begins with the single dose, and the evidence collected between the time of the first and second doses in tens of thousands of people in the Phase 3 trials suggests that the level of affinity maturation may provide enough protection to meet the standards we have set for vaccine approval during this pandemic even without the second dose.

While we know that the single dose can protect against disease, we don’t yet know how long this immune protection will last, and at what level. However, there is no rule that says that vaccines must be boosted within weeks of each other. For measles, the booster dose is given years after the first dose. If the booster dose could be given six months or a year after the first dose, while maintaining high efficacy before the second dose, that would allow twice as many people to get vaccinated between now and later next year, accelerating herd immunity — greatly helping to end the crisis phase of the pandemic in the United States.

How would we go about being more sure and getting the proper authorizations? First, we should look at what data we do have. In both trials, a number of people dropped out before getting the second dose. While these are small but nonrandom samples, we could follow up to see what happened to these people. Lack of infection among this smaller group would not be sufficient to give us the green light we need, but a spike of infections would be a reason for caution.

Crucially, though, we should begin immediate single-dose trials, recruiting volunteers from low-risk populations who are first in line for the vaccinations. For example, among health care workers protective equipment works, rates of infection among this group have fallen sharply and severe disease is much more rare.Younger essential workers without risk factors are less likely to be severely affected if they are exposed since this disease’s impact rises steeply with age. Just as tens of thousands of people volunteered for the earlier vaccine trials, many may well volunteer to test a placebo against a second dose, allowing us to quickly ascertain questions of durability and effectiveness of the single dose.

Is it very risky for those volunteers? There are scientific reasons to believe that the risk is not that high. For one thing, the initial shot — the prime — is clearly providing some immunity, and even if low-risk people are exposed to the virus later on, the natural infection in them could act like the booster: bolstering their immune system even further without causing severe, or even mild, disease. The rarity of reinfections from natural infections supports that line of thinking. Second, what we know about the immune system and Phase 1 and 2 data suggests that older people’s immune systems do not respond as strongly to the single dose, which means that we should keep both this trial and the possibility of a single dose reserved for lower-risk groups: healthy people under 65 without significant multiple comorbidities. The key question we’re looking at is the durability of the immunity provided by that dose, whether it wanes over time and by how much. Immunity is not a switch that gets turned off overnight; we could monitor these volunteers monthly and stop the trial quickly if a significant uptick was detected.

The numbers need not be huge to provide us an answer. The benefit, however, is great. For one thing, we could double the number of lower-risk groups we could cover, especially essential workers who have suffered so much during this pandemic as they do not have the luxury of working from home. Second, we’d be able to roll out the vaccine much more quickly — now, the United States is planning to hold off half the doses in freezers, delaying vaccination. And a quicker rollout would help us get the pandemic under control much faster.

Even if we found the single dose to be somewhat less efficient than two doses, it’s important to remember that not long ago we would have been thrilled to have a vaccine even less effective than the single-dose numbers we’re seeing now.

If we start examining the effectiveness of a single dose now, and if we find that the data warrants it, we can go forward with it as quickly as possible. The prospect of adding hundreds of millions to those who can be vaccinated immediately in the coming year is not something to be dismissed.

If you were to approve a coronavirus vaccine, would you approve one that you only knew protected people only from the most mild form of Covid-19, or one that would prevent its serious complications?

The answer is obvious. You would want to protect against the worst cases.

But that’s not how the companies testing three of the leading coronavirus vaccine candidates, Moderna, Pfizer and AstraZeneca, whose U.S. trial is on hold, are approaching the problem.

According to the protocols for their studies, which they released late last week, a vaccine could meet the companies’ benchmark for success if it lowered the risk of mild Covid-19, but was never shown to reduce moderate or severe forms of the disease, or the risk of hospitalization, admissions to the intensive care unit or death.

To say a vaccine works should mean that most people no longer run the risk of getting seriously sick. That’s not what these trials will determine.

The Moderna and AstraZeneca studies will involve about 30,000 participants each; Pfizer’s will have 44,000. Half the participants will receive two doses of vaccines separated by three or four weeks, and the other half will receive saltwater placebo shots. The final determination of efficacy will occur after 150 to 160 participants develop Covid-19. But that is only if the trials are allowed to run long enough. Pfizer will look at the accumulating data four times, Moderna twice and AstraZeneca once to determine if efficacy has been established, potentially leading to an early end to the trials.

Knowing how a clinical trial defines its primary endpoint — the measure used to determine a vaccine’s efficacy — is critical to understanding the knowledge it is built to discover. In the Moderna and Pfizer trials, even a mild case of Covid-19 — for instance, a cough plus a positive lab test — would qualify and muddy the results. AstraZeneca is slightly more stringent but would still count mild symptoms like a cough plus fever as a case. Only moderate or severe cases should be counted.

There are several reasons this is a problem.

First, mild Covid-19 is far more common than severe Covid-19, so most of the efficacy data is likely to pertain to mild disease. But there is no guarantee that reducing the risk of mild Covid-19 will also reduce the risk of moderate or severe Covid-19.

The reason is that the vaccine may not work equally well in frail and other at-risk populations. Healthy adults, who could form a majority of trial participants, might be less likely to get mild Covid-19, but adults over 65 — particularly those with significant frailty — might still get sick.

This is the case with influenza vaccines, which reduce the risk of mild disease in healthy adults. But there is no solid evidence they reduce the number of deaths, which occur largely among older people. In fact, significant increases in vaccination rates over the past decades have not been associated with reductions in deaths.

Second, Moderna and Pfizer acknowledge their vaccines appear to induce side effects that are similar to the symptoms of mild Covid-19. In Pfizer’s early phase trial, more than half of the vaccinated participants experienced headache, muscle pain and chills.

If the vaccines ultimately provide no benefit beyond a reduced risk of mild Covid-19, they could end up causing more discomfort than they prevent.

Third, even if the studies are allowed to run past their interim analyses, stopping a trial of 30,000 or 44,000 people after just 150 or so Covid-19 cases may make statistical sense, but it defies common sense. Giving a vaccine to hundreds of millions of healthy people based on such limited data requires a real leap of faith.

Declaring a winner without adequate evidence would also undermine the studies of other vaccines, as participants in those studies drop out to receive the newly approved vaccine. There may well be insufficient data to address the aged and underrepresented minorities. There will be no data for children, adolescents and pregnant women since they have been excluded. Vaccines must be thoroughly tested in all populations in which they will be used.

None of this is to say that these vaccines can’t reduce the risk of serious complications of Covid-19. But unless the trials are allowed to run long enough to address that question, we won’t know the answer.

The trials need to focus on the right clinical outcome — whether the vaccines protect against moderate and severe forms of Covid-19 — and be fully completed. It is not too late for the companies to do this, and the Food and Drug Administration, which reviewed the protocols, could still suggest modifications.

These are some of the most important clinical trials in history, affecting a vast majority of the planet’s population. It’s hard to imagine how much higher the stakes can be to get this right. Cutting corners should not be an option.

WASHINGTON — The coronavirus vaccine made by Moderna is highly protective, according to new data released on Tuesday, setting the stage for its emergency authorization this week by federal regulators and the start of its distribution across the country.

The Food and Drug Administration intends to authorize emergency use of the vaccine on Friday, people familiar with the agency’s plans said. The decision would give millions of Americans access to a second coronavirus vaccine beginning as early as Monday. The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, cleared last week, was the first to be authorized.

“This is great news, as this now brings us to two products with high levels of efficacy,” said Rupali Limaye, an associate scientist at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

The review by the F.D.A. confirms Moderna’s earlier assessment that its vaccine had an efficacy rate of 94.1 percent in a trial of 30,000 people. Side effects — including fever, headache and fatigue — were common and unpleasant, but not dangerous, the agency found.

The F.D.A. said its analysis “supported a favorable safety profile, with no specific safety concerns identified that would preclude issuance of an emergency use authorization.”

The success of Moderna’s vaccine has become all the more critical to fighting the pandemic as other vaccine efforts have faltered. The hopeful news arrives at a time of record-setting numbers of coronavirus cases that are overwhelming hospitals and of an ever-increasing death toll, which reached a bleak milestone of 300,000 on Monday.

The data release is the first step of a public review process that will include a daylong meeting on Thursday by an independent advisory panel of experts. They will hear from Moderna, F.D.A. scientists and the public before voting on whether to recommend authorization. The panel is expected to vote yes, and the F.D.A. generally follows the experts’ recommendations.

Distribution of about six million doses could then begin next week, significantly adding to the millions of doses already being shipped by Pfizer and BioNTech. Health care workers received the first shots on Monday of that vaccine, which has an efficacy rate of 95 percent.

Emergency authorization is not the same as full approval. It allows an experimental vaccine to be used if there is evidence that its potential benefits outweigh its risks, while more data is collected to apply for full approval.

Barry R. Bloom, a professor of public health at Harvard, said the results from Moderna and Pfizer were “extraordinarily comparable.”

“The good news is they both did everything they were supposed to do,” he said. Based on the data, Moderna’s vaccine may be slightly less effective in people 65 and older than Pfizer-BioNTech’s. “But it’s hard to tell,” he said.

Compared with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, Moderna’s was more likely to cause headaches, sore arms and related side effects, Dr. Bloom noted.

The vaccine rollout is one of the most ambitious in the nation’s history, but experts are uncertain how long it will take for all 330 million Americans to be inoculated, let alone return the country’s businesses, schools and everyday routines to a new normal.

Last summer, the U.S. government signed deals with Moderna and Pfizer to acquire 200 million doses in the first quarter of 2021. Because both vaccines require two doses, those contracts guaranteed enough doses for 100 million people. The government announced last week that it had purchased another 100 million doses from Moderna for the second quarter, increasing the number to 150 million who can be vaccinated.

Both vaccines will be provided free of charge.

Because Moderna’s vaccine requires less extreme cold storage than the Pfizer-BioNTech product, it will be easier to ship, store and handle.

“Moderna is the one that I would take out to rural areas and community health centers and private doctors’ offices,” Dr. Bloom said, adding that hospitals would be better equipped to deal with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.

Moderna’s vaccine has become a symbol of the triumphs of government scientists during the pandemic. After China released the genetic sequence of the new virus in early January, scientists at Moderna and the National Institutes of Health were able to zero in on the design for a vaccine in just two days. Unlike Pfizer, Moderna has worked closely with Operation Warp Speed, the federal program aimed at accelerating vaccine development. Nearly $2.5 billion in federal funds helped Moderna buy raw materials, expand its factory and enlarge its work force by 50 percent.

Moderna’s vaccine effort stands in contrast to two other high-profile projects that the United States had hoped would build up its supply: one from the pharmaceutical companies Sanofi of France and GlaxoSmithKline of Britain, and another from the British-Swedish drug maker AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford.

AstraZeneca and Oxford ended up using two different doses in clinical trials in Britain and Brazil. At one level, the efficacy was 62 percent, and at the other it was 90 percent. The muddled results have left it unclear when AstraZeneca will have enough data to secure an emergency authorization.

Separately, Sanofi and GlaxoSmithKline had disappointing results in early clinical trials. While their vaccine produced a promising immune response in volunteers under 50, it failed to do so in older ones. The companies are planning a new set of trials with a different version, making it unlikely they can produce a vaccine before the end of 2021.

Moderna’s vaccine has had much smoother sailing. The F.D.A. review showed that it worked equally well in white, Black and Hispanic volunteers, men and women, healthy participants and those at risk of severe Covid-19 with conditions like obesity and diabetes. For people 65 and older, the trial provided an estimated efficacy of 86.4 percent, lower than the overall estimate of 94.1 percent. But the apparent difference was not statistically significant. And 86.4 percent is still very high.

So far, two potential differences between the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines have emerged in the F.D.A.’s reviews, but the findings may reflect a shortage of data rather than genuine distinctions.

Moderna produced more evidence that its vaccine can prevent severe disease. Of 30 volunteers who developed severe cases of Covid, all had received the placebo, not the vaccine.

Dr. Limaye called that a crucial finding.

“We’re worried about severe cases that lead to hospitalization, which leads to death,” she said. “The fact that they were able to prevent any cases of severity — I mean, that’s huge.”

On this front, the Pfizer-BioNTech findings were less compelling. Ten severe cases were reported in the placebo group and one in the vaccinated group. Those numbers are too small to gauge the vaccine’s ability to prevent serious illness.

“The available data for these outcomes did not allow for firm conclusions,” the F.D.A. said.

A second difference is that the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine started to protect against the coronavirus within about 10 days of the first dose. Moderna’s vaccine, by contrast, did not reveal such a striking effect after the first dose.

But fewer cases of Covid occurred among participants in the early days of the Moderna trial, making it harder to measure differences between the vaccinated and the placebo groups. In any case, health officials have said that for both vaccines, two doses are essential for full protection.

How long that protection will last is still an open question. In a recent study, Moderna found that three months after the second dose, volunteers were still making high levels of antibodies. But researchers don’t yet know what levels are needed to maintain immunity. Time, and more research, will tell whether booster shots will be required.

Another puzzle is whether the vaccine can prevent people from spreading the disease, which would greatly help to stop the pandemic. Those who are infected but have no symptoms are thought to be a major source of transmission.

A vaccine that prevents illness might still allow people to become infected and harbor the virus in their noses long enough to transmit it.

New data from Moderna suggest that its vaccine may reduce transmission. Researchers found that people who had one shot were less likely than those in the placebo group to have symptom-free infections in their noses — and therefore less likely to be contagious.

The documents published Tuesday made clear that side effects were particularly common after the second dose, but typically lasted only a day. Experts say people may need to take a day off work after getting the shot.

During the Moderna trial, researchers also kept an eye out for volunteers who developed new disorders. In a trial lasting several months with 30,000 people, it is normal for some to come down with conditions that have nothing to do with the vaccine, health experts say. Comparing the rates between the vaccine and placebo groups — as well as general background rates — can help pinpoint serious concerns and rule out coincidences.

During the Moderna trial, three vaccinated participants and one in the placebo group developed a form of temporary facial paralysis called Bell’s palsy, which can last weeks or longer. It can be triggered by viral infections and other causes. Some 40,000 cases occur annually in the United States. Years of intense research have failed to find a link between the disorder and any vaccine routinely recommended in the United States.

In the review released on Tuesday, the F.D.A. said: “Currently available information is insufficient to determine a causal relationship with the vaccine.”

In the Pfizer-BioNTech trial, four cases were detected in the vaccine group, including one in a person with a history of the disorder, and none in the placebo group.

Dr. Peter Marks, the F.D.A.’s top vaccine regulator, said Monday in an interview with JAMA, that the Bell’s palsy cases were most likely not caused by the vaccine, and that the seeming difference between the two groups of volunteers was just a matter of chance.

The F.D.A. said it would recommend tracking Bell’s palsy cases as the vaccines roll out.

The agency’s analysis did not find serious allergic reactions to the Moderna vaccine. The same was true in the Pfizer-BioNTech trial, but when vaccinations for the public began in Britain last week, two health care workers with a history of serious allergies had a severe and potentially life-threatening reaction called anaphylaxis.

British health officials have said that people with a history of anaphylaxis should avoid the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced last weekend that people with serious allergies can be safely vaccinated, with close monitoring for 30 minutes after receiving the shot.

While the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines are similar in their ingredients, but not identical, it is not clear whether an allergic reaction to one would occur with the other. Both consist of genetic material called mRNA encased in a bubble made from a mixture of fats. The two companies use different fats.

Moderna has requested authorization to vaccinate people 18 and older, like those in its study. The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine was authorized for people as young as 16, because the trial had some younger volunteers. Both companies are running trials on children as young as 12 and have plans to start studying even younger children.

Scientists on Wednesday praised the decision by AstraZeneca to suspend its late-stage coronavirus vaccine trials and begin a safety review after learning that a participant had developed a serious neurological condition. Dr. Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health, testifying at a Senate hearing on Wednesday, said the step “ought to be reassuring.”

The results of the safety review, to be conducted by an independent board of experts, will help determine if the participant’s condition was a reaction to the vaccine candidate or merely coincidental, and are expected to heavily influence whether and when trials might resume.

But many details about the trial’s suspension and the event that triggered it remain murky. Researchers do not yet know what caused the volunteer’s symptoms, how long the evaluation process will take or what the consequences might be.

Part of the review will include generating a timeline of the participant’s symptoms to see if they match up roughly with when the vaccine was administered. The committee will also investigate other potential causes of the symptoms, in a process of elimination.

After determining whether AstraZeneca’s vaccine is the probable cause, experts will advise the company on whether to resume its trials.

Regulatory agencies like the Food and Drug Administration will also likely collect data and give additional input along the way, said Dr. Mark Goldberger, an infectious disease expert at the Global Antibiotic Research and Development Partnership and a former F.D.A. official.

No further doses of the vaccine will be administered in the interim.

In early-stage trials, AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate, built from an innocuous virus, known to cause common colds in chimpanzees, that was engineered to carry coronavirus genes, yielded promising safety data in people, although several participants experienced mild or moderate side effects including fevers and aches.

But the product was not necessarily responsible for the spate of symptoms experienced by the ailing late-stage trial participant, said Mark Slifka, a vaccine expert at Oregon Health and Sciences University.

More than 10,000 adult volunteers were dosed with AstraZeneca’s vaccine in the company’s Phase 2/3 trial in the United Kingdom, where the participant fell ill. “The larger your study group, the more likely you’ll find an adverse event,” Dr. Slifka said. “This could occur spontaneously.”

Editors’ Picks

Seeking a One-Bedroom in ‘a Quintessential New York Brownstone.’ How Far Would Their Budget Take Them?

My Father Was Abusive. Should I Attend His Memorial Service?

‘If I Go Missing’ Folders for the (Very Unlikely) Possibility That You Do
A source familiar with the event, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said in an interview on Tuesday that the afflicted volunteer had experienced symptoms consistent with a condition called transverse myelitis, or inflammation of the spinal cord.

In a statement to reporters on Wednesday, an AstraZeneca spokesperson, Michele Meixell, said that the individual did not have a confirmed case of transverse myelitis. She said that the company’s chief executive, Pascal Soriot, had stated in a phone call reported by STAT “that there is no final diagnosis and that there will not be one until more tests are carried out. Those tests will be delivered to an independent safety committee that will review the event and establish a final diagnosis.”

The company did not respond to a request for clarification about whether transverse myelitis was suspected.

Transverse myelitis is relatively rare, sparking symptoms in roughly 1,400 people each year in the United States, according to the National Institutes of Health. The condition can result in pain, muscle weakness, paralysis or bladder problems. Its root cause is often mysterious, although doctors believe the syndrome generally results when inflammatory responses in the body go awry, sometimes as a reaction to an ongoing or past infection, said Dr. Felicia Chow, a neurologist at the University of California, San Francisco. “It’s not uncommon that we never figure out the cause,” she said.

There has been some past speculation that vaccines might be able to trigger transverse myelitis, she added. A handful of vaccines have previously been tied to a smattering of other autoimmune disorders, including Guillain-Barre syndrome, wherein the immune system attacks the nerves. Such complications, however, are rare.

Both transverse myelitis and Guillain-Barre syndrome have been pinpointed as possible complications of Covid-19.

Although vaccines are designed to be harmless to humans, they must still rouse the body’s defenses to marshal a protective immune response. But if the wrong subsets of cells or molecules are spurred into action, or if the body cannot rein in its own responses, this could set off a cascade that starts to damage healthy tissues, said Dr. Serena Spudich, a neurologist at Yale University.

The suspension appears to mark the second time that AstraZeneca has halted coronavirus vaccine trials because of severe neurological symptoms, according to information sheets uploaded to a clinical trial registry, as reported by Nature News. Another participant developed symptoms of transverse myelitis, researchers reported in July, and was later diagnosed with an “unrelated neurological illness.” After a safety review, trials resumed.

Ms. Meixell, the company spokesperson, confirmed the July pause, saying that the volunteer had “an undiagnosed case of multiple sclerosis, which the independent panel concluded was unrelated to the vaccine.”

Adverse events do occur during vaccine trials, which are explicitly designed to assess such situations to ensure that the products are both safe and effective in a wide range of people. Even if the newly reported symptoms were eventually tied to AstraZeneca’s vaccine, trials could still continue, especially if the case appears to be an outlier.

“This doesn’t necessarily mean the vaccine is harmful,” said Saad Omer, a vaccine expert at Yale University. As things stand, however, “we don’t yet know the implications,” he said.

Complicating matters is the vaccine’s dosing regimen, which involves two injections for each participant, four weeks apart. It is unclear whether the volunteer who experienced symptoms of transverse myelitis began to feel ill after receiving the first or second dose — a factor that could affect how other participants are treated, should the trial resume, Dr. Slifka said.

AstraZeneca representatives did not respond to repeated requests for comment on the specifics of the pause or the measures they might take before attempting to resume trials.

While the expert safety panel and the F.D.A. may independently weigh in as the situation develops, it is typically up to the trial’s sponsor — in this case, AstraZeneca — to continue or end a trial, according to F.D.A. guidance.

If the most recent adverse event is eventually confirmed as another neurological syndrome, “absolutely, they would want to go back and understand the first case better,” Dr. Spudich said. Although the first participant’s multiple sclerosis diagnosis was deemed unrelated to the vaccine, the data could be worth re-evaluating, she said.

There is a possibility, for instance, that a mild, undiagnosed case of multiple sclerosis may have been unmasked or exacerbated by the vaccine. However, it remains unclear whether that first volunteer received a vaccine or placebo, and how AstraZeneca would proceed with participants who have so far received the first dose but not the second.

In an online event on Thursday, Mr. Soriot, AstraZeneca’s C.E.O., said that the company still expected to know by the end of the year whether its vaccine works in people, provided trials are able to resume soon. Such pauses are “very common, actually, and many experts will tell you this,” Mr. Soriot added. “The difference with other vaccine trials is, the whole world is not watching them.”

Although the forecast for AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate remains hazy, Dr. Goldberger emphasized that “this is a normal part of doing business in therapeutics and vaccines.”

“It’s very important to get safe and effective vaccines out there,” he added. Should safety issues arise if a vaccine is prematurely rushed to approval, “that’s going to affect general trust and willingness to be vaccinated,” he said. “So you’ve got to sort through all of this to the end.”

The Moderna vaccine is one of the vaccines currently available in the United States and other countries to protect against COVID-19, which is the disease the novel coronavirus causes.

Clinical trials and real world data suggest that the Moderna vaccine effectively and safely protects adults against the virus and its complications.

This article will discuss the efficacy of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine as well as its potential side effects. It will also consider the benefits of getting a COVID-19 vaccine, including its potential role in ending the pandemic.

What is the Moderna vaccine?

The Moderna vaccine is also known as the mRNA-1273 vaccine. It is one of the vaccines currently available to protect people against COVID-19.

Moderna are an American pharmaceutical and biotechnology company who research and develop drugs and vaccines.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)Trusted Source issued emergency use authorization (EUA) for the vaccine in December 2020. Since then, Canada, the European Union, and the United Kingdom have also authorized its use.

Ingredients
The Moderna COVID-19 vaccine containsTrusted Source the following:

messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)
lipids SM-102, polyethylene glycol (PEG) 2000 dimyristoyl glycerol, and 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
cholesterol
tromethamine
tromethamine hydrochloride
acetic acid
sodium acetate
sucrose
Allergen information
It is free fromTrusted Source:

eggs
latex
preservatives
How does the Moderna vaccine work?
The Moderna vaccine is an mRNA vaccine. These are new typesTrusted Source of vaccines that work differently from other vaccines.

mRNA vaccines deliver the genetic code to our cells to make a protein that triggers the body’s immune response.

The body then produces antibodies and develops longer lasting immunity that can fight off the SARS-CoV-2 virus should it enter the body at a later stage.

Administering the Moderna vaccine
Healthcare professionals will administer the vaccine in two separate doses.

They will give the vaccine as an injection into the upper arm, and they will administer the second dose 28 daysTrusted Source after the first.

Moderna vaccine logistics
Vaccine logistics refers to how healthcare staff store the vaccine and how organizations distribute it to the wider population.

Storage
The FDATrusted Source state that staff must store the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine frozen, between -13°F (-25ºC) and 5°F (-15ºC).

Staff can store the vaccine in the refrigerator between 36°F (2°C) and 46°F (8°C) for up to 30 days before use.

Once staff withdraw the first dose from a multidose vial, they should keep the vial at between 36°F (2°C) to 77°F (25°C). They should discard the vial after 6 hours because this vaccine does not contain any preservatives.

Distribution
In the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) are managing the distribution of Moderna vaccines through the pharmaceutical distribution company McKesson.

McKesson also manage the Vaccines for Children Program, and they managed the distribution of the H1N1 vaccine during the swine flu pandemic.

Who should have the Moderna vaccine?
The Moderna vaccine is authorized for use in people aged 18 years and over. Governments will roll it out to the wider population according to vaccine availability and individual needs.

The CDC have given recommendations for who should receive the COVID-19 vaccine first. They recommend the following orderTrusted Source for vaccinations:

Phase 1a: The first distribution phase will include the following people:
healthcare personnel
residents of long-term care facilities
Phase 1b: The second distribution phase will include the following people:
essential workers
people aged 75 years and older
Phase 1c: The third distribution phase will include the following people:
people aged 65–74 years
people aged 16–64 years with underlying medical conditions that increase the risk of serious complications from COVID-19
other essential workers
As the availability of COVID-19 vaccines increases, these vaccination recommendations will expand to include more groups.

However, it is important to note that these are CDC recommendations. Each U.S. state and each country will have its own plan for prioritizing the administration of the COVID-19 vaccines.

Before vaccination, individuals should tell their vaccine provider about their medical conditions. They should also inform them if they have any of the followingTrusted Source:

a bleeding disorder
allergies
a fever
prescriptions for medications that thin the blood or affect the immune system
A person should also inform their vaccine provider if they are any of the following:

immunocompromised
pregnant or planning to become pregnant
breastfeeding
A person should also tell the vaccine provider if they have previously received another COVID-19 vaccine.

Who should not get the vaccine?
The CDCTrusted Source advise that people with certain allergies should not get the Moderna vaccine. This includes people who have had allergic reactions to PEG or polysorbate and those who have had a severe allergic reaction, or an immediate allergic reaction of any severity, to any ingredient in an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.

An immediate allergic reaction involves experiencing a reaction up to 4 hours after receiving the vaccine. Symptoms may involve:

hives
swelling
difficulty breathing
During pregnancy
mRNA vaccines such as the Moderna vaccine are unlikely to pose specific risks to pregnant people.

However, COVID-19 itself puts pregnant people at increased riskTrusted Source of severe illness, hospital admission, and death compared with non-pregnant people of a similar age.

COVID-19 may also cause adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preterm birth.

The FDATrusted Source do advise pregnant or breastfeeding people, as well as those who plan to become pregnant, to speak with their doctor about getting the vaccine.

Learn more about COVID-19 during pregnancy here.

Is the Moderna vaccine effective?
When considering the effects of the Moderna vaccine on COVID-19, it is important to distinguish between effectiveness and efficacy.

EfficacyTrusted Source refers to how something performs under ideal and controlled circumstances, such as in clinical trials.

Effectiveness, on the other hand, describes the performance of something in “real world” situations.

Learn more about vaccine efficacy vs. effectiveness here.

Efficacy
A large 2020 trial, involving 30,420 adult volunteers at various sites across the U.S., reports that the Moderna vaccine has a 94.1% efficacy rate against COVID-19, including against severe disease.

The average age of participants was 51.4 years, with 24.8% aged 65 years or older. Just over half of the participants (52.7%) were male. The majority of participants were white (79.2%), with racial and ethnic demographics generally representative of U.S. demographics (10.2% Black or African American and 20.5% Hispanic or Latino).

Effectiveness
Another study, which has yet to undergo peer review, investigated the real world effectiveness of the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines. The researchers compared 31,069 vaccinated individuals (having received at least one dose of either vaccine) with 31,069 unvaccinated people.

The findings suggest that getting both doses of either COVID-19 vaccine was 88.7% effective in preventing infection.

Those who did get COVID-19 following vaccination had significantly lower 14-day hospital admission rates than unvaccinated people of a similar demographic.

Does it protect against new variants?
According to the World Health Organization (WHO)Trusted Source, the evidence so far indicates that the Moderna vaccine is effective against the new variants of COVID-19.

These new variants include those that scientists first identified in the U.K. and South Africa.

Can you still pass COVID-19 on to others?
Preliminary dataTrusted Source suggest that the Moderna vaccine may offer some level of protection against transmission to others. It may even prevent symptomatic infection after just the first dose.

However, research into this is still ongoing, and no definitive conclusions are possible just yet.

Side effects of the Moderna vaccine
The most commonTrusted Source side effects of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine are:

chills
headache
tiredness
injection site reactions, such as:
pain
flushed skin
swelling
These symptoms may develop within a day or two of receiving the vaccine and may last for a few days.

Side effects are more likely after the second dose.

Methods to relieve these side effects may include:

moving the sore arm around
drinking plenty of fluids
taking over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen
Serious side effects, such as anaphylaxis, following vaccination with the Moderna vaccine are rareTrusted Source. Anaphylaxis is a life threatening allergic reaction that develops within minutes to hours of vaccination. It may cause the following symptoms:

breathing difficulties
confusion
feeling lightheaded or faint
fainting
rapid heartbeat
hives
Learn more about anaphylaxis here.

Other rare side effectsTrusted Source following vaccination can include myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the tissue surrounding the heart). These side effects are more likely following the second dose of the vaccine.

Individuals who experience a severe allergic reaction should call 911 or go to the nearest emergency department.

Those who develop other side effects should speak with a pharmacist or doctor if these effects are persistent or bothersome.

Benefits of the Moderna vaccine
The main benefit of getting a COVID-19 vaccine is protection against the symptoms and complications of COVID-19.

Vaccination may reduceTrusted Source the chance of transmitting the virus.

At present, it is unclear how long COVID-19 vaccine protection will last. As time goes on, this will become clearer. Until then, it is important that people who are vaccinated still wear a face maskTrusted Source, practice physical distancing, and regularly wash their hands.

Together with these measures, COVID-19 vaccines are important tools in stopping the pandemic. Once the pandemic is over, people can likely return to their previous activities, including spending time with friends and family.

Comparisons with other vaccines
Currently, the U.S. has authorizedTrusted Source three vaccines for the prevention of COVID-19: the Moderna vaccine, the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, and the JanssenTrusted Source vaccine.

The Moderna vaccine has a similar efficacy to the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, which has an efficacy rate of 95%.

However, one benefit of the Moderna vaccine is that it is easier to store because it does not require temperatures as cold as the Pfizer vaccine.

Large-scale clinical trials for other vaccines, such as the AstraZeneca and Novavax vaccines, are also in progress or in the planning stages.

The AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine candidate currently demonstrates an efficacy of 63.09%Trusted Source against symptomatic COVID-19.

The Novavax COVID-19 vaccine​ candidate shows 89.3% efficacy in clinical trials, as well as 60–86% efficacyTrusted Source against emerging variants.

Risks of the Moderna vaccine
The phase 3 clinical trial of the Moderna vaccine did not identify any safety concerns, and there was no evidence of vaccine-associated enhanced respiratory disease (VAERD).

Scientists have observed cases of VAERD in situations where some people have received a particular vaccine and then come into contact with the pathogen later and developed severe disease. Examples of VAERD can includeTrusted Source conditions such as measles or respiratory syncytial virus.

The FDATrusted Source analyzed data from tens of thousands of study participants. The data suggest that the benefits from the vaccine outweigh any possible risks.

One of the risks of the vaccine is the potential for a severe allergic reaction. This, however, is a rare eventTrusted Source.

Those who have allergies to any ingredients in the Moderna vaccine should not get this vaccine. They should discuss their options with a doctor.

Studies into the longer-term safety of the vaccine are ongoing.

What if you do not get the vaccine?
Not everyone will receive a COVID-19 vaccine. Some people may be unable to get one due to health issues. Others may choose not to for various reasons.

The FDATrusted Source state that it is an individual’s choice as to whether or not they receive the vaccine and that those who choose not to will not experience any changes in their standard medical care.

However, those who do not receive a vaccination will be at greater risk of developing COVID-19 and experiencing its complications. Therefore, they should take care to follow the guidelines of wearing a face mask, practicing physical distancing, and regularly washing their hands.

There may be other implications for those who do not get a vaccine, including in relation to inter-country travel.

Summary
Clinical trials and real world data suggest that the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine provides significant protection from the disease.

The Moderna vaccine appears to be safe for most people, though minor side effects are common. Serious reactions, however, are rare.

COVID-19 vaccines such as the Moderna vaccine are important tools in ending the pandemic.

However, until the pandemic ends, people should continue to wear face masks, practice hand hygiene, and physically distance themselves from others, even after they receive their vaccination.

The year 2020 will enter the history books as the year in which a new deadly coronavirus brought the world to a halt. Pharmaceutical companies jumped to the rescue with major investments in vaccine research and development. Last month, one pharmaceutical company after the other started releasing insights about the efficacy of their candidate vaccines. While these announcements have major implications for the world’s economy in 2021, they also provide valuable lessons for managers who want to use data to make better decisions.

Lesson 1: Big data is often smaller than it appears.
It is November 9, 6:45 AM EST. Pfizer and BioNTech announce that they have performed an interim analysis of an ongoing Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) with more than 43,000 volunteers from diverse backgrounds. Their vaccine, they report, was found to be more than 90% effective in preventing Covid-19. That’s impressive — better than the average influenza vaccine, and better than the 50% threshold set by the World Health Organization for an effective vaccine.

How should we evaluate these data?

The study involved more than 43,000 participants. On its face, that seems quite a large sample size — in general, large samples allow greater confidence. But vaccine efficacy is expressed as a percentage, and this can be misleading. To properly evaluate these data, and calibrate your confidence, you need to understand how the vaccine efficacy percentage was derived.

The math is quite simple. First, count the number of people who developed Covid-19 in the vaccinated group. Second, divide that by the number of people who developed it in the placebo group. Third, subtract that quotient from 1, and you’ll get the efficacy rate.

In this study, 8 people in the vaccinated group developed Covid-19, compared to 86 in the placebo group. That’s 8/86, or .093 — which, subtracted from 1, gives you an efficacy rate of 90.7%. Hence “more than 90%.”

The important insight is that it’s not the overall number of participants in the study that is relevant here, but the number of people who developed Covid-19. It doesn’t matter much whether the study involved 40,000 participants, 4,000 participants, or even just 400 participants. What matters is that there are 94 confirmed cases.

One might question whether a total of 94 confirmed cases is enough to make informed decisions? But it is. A ratio of 8/86 in a randomized trial is extremely unlikely to happen due to chance — or any reason other than the vaccine. So these results should give you great confidence that the vaccine efficacy rate exceeds the World Health Organization’s standard of 50%. People are often impressed with data that seems big but underestimate the value of small data.

You need to be wary of the distinction between big and small data in business too. Take this example from marketing. You want to understand the impact of an advertisement campaign on sales. A consultancy firm proposes to do an A/B test. The study will involve 20,000 consumers, half of whom will be randomly selected to see your advertisements. Using the latest technology, the study will track the purchase decisions of all participants in the subsequent month.

A month later, the firm tells you that consumers exposed to your campaign bought 50% more than consumers who were not exposed. The impact of your campaign appears to be more positive than expected. But to properly evaluate this result, you need to realize that conversion is a low-probability event (like contracting Covid-19). If your baseline conversion rate is 1/1000, a 50% lift would correspond to only 15 buyers in the exposed group compared 10 buyers in the unexposed group. That’s not enough data to conclude your advertising had an impact on sales.

When studying low-probability events, data that seems big is often smaller than it appears. For this baseline conversion rate, you should ask the consulting firm to increase the number of consumers participating in the study from 20,000 to about 160,000. A 50% lift would then correspond to 120 purchases in the exposed group compared to 80 purchases in the unexposed group, which should give you much greater confidence that your campaign is indeed effective.

It is not always obvious how to determine whether the size of your data is sufficient. That’s where statistical formulas for significance and power come in. They’re too involved to get into here — but, fortunately, there are many easy-to-use statistical calculators freely available online. Using these calculators will help you to develop your intuitions about data size.

Statistical formulas are only part of the answer, of course. Ultimately, you have to make judgment calls. How confident do you want to be before you roll out an intervention? That depends on the costs and the risks. A 5% chance that your result is a false positive may be acceptable in some situations but not in others (as in the context of vaccination).

Lesson 2: Precision can undermine accuracy.
It is November 11, two days after the Pfizer/BioNTech press release. The Gamaleya National Research Center for Epidemiology and Microbiology in Moscow announces that in a trial involving 40,000 volunteers, its Sputnik V vaccine has demonstrated 92% efficacy. Five days later, on November 16, Moderna announces that in a trial involving more than 30,000 participants, its vaccine has demonstrated 94.5% efficacy.

Vaccine efficacy is still expressed as a percentage, but something has changed: The language and percentages are now more precise. The Gamaleya Center does not say “above 90%” but “92%.” Moderna does not say “94%” but “94.5%.”

Why?

We cannot be sure, but both companies probably felt that more precision in the percentage would create a greater sense of reliability — and would demonstrate that they had done better than Pfizer. And that’s indeed how stories of these announcements played out in the press. For instance, the Belgian newspaper De Standaard wrote that “the candidate vaccine of the American biotech company Moderna works even better than that of Pfizer.”

Beware precision in this sort of situation. It’s a commonly used tactic in persuasion, but it can threaten your ability to interpret data well and make smart decisions. Data presentations often sacrifice accuracy for precision.

Precision can be beguiling. It somehow feels helpful to know, for example, that according to Interbrand, a global brand consultancy, McDonalds is currently the 8th most valuable brand in the world, worth $42,816,000,000 — and that this year it’s worth 6% less than last year. But it’s simply impossible to rank or estimate the value of brands with this level of precision, and anybody who assumes that it is possible will end up making bad decisions.

How can we improve?

Business, in the end, is social science, and social science is messy. Get comfortable with that. Next time you’re presented with estimates, resist the urge to equate precisely reported numbers with high-quality data. Instead, solicit ranges to gauge confidence in point estimates. You’ll understand what you’re dealing with much better if you know that the efficacy rate of a vaccine ranges between 70% and 95%, or that the value of a brand ranges between $20B and $70B.

Lesson 3: Distinguish between prediction and “post-diction.”
It is November 23, one week after Moderna’s press release. AstraZeneca presents interim analyses of a study involving more than 11,000 participants. The analyses suggest a vaccine efficacy rate of 70%. That’s lower than the other vaccine candidates. But AstraZeneca has some excellent news to report. Their study used two different dosing regimens — and one of them, the half-dose regimen, performed on a subset of 2,741 participants, showed vaccine efficacy of 90%. That puts its vaccine in roughly the same category of efficacy as the others already discussed.

How should we evaluate these data?

That’s right: We need to consider the absolute numbers. AstraZeneca reported a total of 131 cases. Although they didn’t provide a breakdown at the time, they later revealed that the 90% efficacy rate for the half-dose regimen is based on 33 confirmed cases: three in the vaccinated group, and 30 in the placebo group. Those numbers should give you confidence that AstraZeneca’s vaccine is effective, but to conclude that the half-dose regimen works better than the full-dose regimen would be premature. The number of confirmed cases is still too small to make fine-grained comparisons between subsets of cases within the vaccinated group.

Moreover, it turns out that the variation in dosage regimens was a mistake by a contractor involved in the study. Also, AstraZeneca later admitted to pooling its results from two differently designed clinical trials, one in Britain and the other in Brazil.

AstraZeneca is far from unique in how it handled this situation. Academic and business researchers make similar mistakes all the time. To make good decisions with data, you need to distinguish between prediction and “post-diction.” Prediction means that you first develop a hypothesis, and then you collect and analyze data in order to test it. Post-diction means that you generate a hypothesis after data has been collected while analyzing the data. It dramatically inflates the likelihood of false positives, which has damaging consequences for decision-making.

Consider this situation. After conducting an A/B test, a marketing analyst reports back to you: “Overall, consumers who saw your campaign bought no more than consumers who didn’t see it. However, your campaign worked really well for women over 50. They purchased a whopping 30% more after being exposed to your advertisements.”

That sounds like useful information, and it might be tempting to make marketing decisions based on it. But you should see this for what it is: post-diction. It’s similar to what AstraZeneca did. If you slice data a million ways, you’ll always be able to find some large differences, some of which, purely due to chance, will be statistically significant.

How can we improve?

We should ask data analysts to preregister their analyses. We should also ask them to inform us when they’re reporting the results of exploratory analyses that were conceived after their data has been collected. When you are presented with statistically significant results, try to get a sense of how many other tests were conducted of which you were not informed.

Conclusion
Data is often hailed as an antidote to the biases of human intuition. But effectively using data for decision-making actually requires that we intelligently harness our intuition. The Covid-19 vaccine trials provide three valuable lessons for managers who want to develop their quantitative intuition: Be wary of big data. Be wary of precision. And beware of post-diction.

With the development of potential vaccines for Covid-19 progressing quickly, we need to invest now in infrastructure for distributing a vaccine globally on an equitable basis as soon as it is proven safe and effective.

Vaccines serve two related but distinct functions. They protect the vaccinated persons against the infection, and they reduce transmission, protecting those not vaccinated by reducing the number of people who can transmit disease, drastically reducing spread — a concept known as herd immunity. Equitable vaccine distribution is essential to achieving herd immunity.

Time is of the essence. The development of candidates for Covid-19 vaccines is progressing faster than that for any other pathogen in history. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there are already two clinical trials underway and more than 50 vaccine candidates in clinical evaluation. Multilateral institutions funded by multiple governments, pharmaceutical companies, and philanthropists are all pouring hundreds of millions into the vaccine development effort, which has helped hasten discovery. We also have vital alliances such as the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), which was set up in the aftermath of the Ebola crisis and is dedicated to financing and coordinating the development of vaccines and ensuring fair global access.

Our opportunity is unprecedented. The previous vaccine-development record was set during the Zika virus outbreak in 2015, when it took seven months to develop a viable candidate for testing, though the outbreak had died down before a vaccine could be sent to clinical trial. By contrast, mRNA-1273, the first vaccine candidate to combat Covid-19, entered clinical trials 64 days after the virus’s genome was sequenced and less than four months after the first known cases were recorded in China. A viral vector-based vaccine using Adeno-5 has also entered clinical trials in China. With the resources of governments, the science behind the vaccines is progressing rapidly, and assuming positive clinical trial results, a vaccine could be ready for deployment in 18 to 24 months.

Alongside the expedited discovery process, we need to plan for equally expedited distribution and delivery. Therefore, those involved in investing and building delivery systems must work as quickly as those in the field of discovery to pave the way ahead and learn from prior vaccine delivery experiences.

In general, higher-income countries have higher vaccination rates for routine vaccines than lower-income countries, and coverage disparities within countries cleave along economic lines. That’s unfortunate. We couldn’t agree more with Bill Gates, who wrote, “During a pandemic, vaccines and antivirals can’t simply be sold to the highest bidder. They should be available and affordable for people who are at the heart of the outbreak and in greatest need. Not only is such distribution the right thing to do, it’s also the right strategy for short-circuiting transmission and preventing future pandemics.”

Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, has been working since 2000 to address vaccine equity and helps vaccinate nearly half of the world’s children. Over the last two decades it has supported 496 vaccine programs in the 73 poorest countries and helped supply them with 600 million vaccine doses every year. While Gavi’s main focus is children, it has helped provide vaccines for people of all ages for epidemic-causing diseases such as yellow fever and meningitis. Based on those experiences, we believe there should be five investment priorities for vaccinating people around the world against Covid-19.

Financing the purchase of vaccines. Many governments of low-income countries may not be able to pay the costs of deploying a new Covid-19 vaccine. They may, however, be able to pay in smaller installments over time. While Gavi can provide some limited financing from its current resources, it’s not enough to address this need; substantial resources are needed immediately. One way to provide this financing is a bond structure backed by OECD countries that would allow the money to be raised in capital markets. The OECD countries would make a legally binding commitment to pay investors in the bonds over time. This would be similar to what Gavi has done using IFFIm.

Strengthening and protecting the health care workforce. Pandemics like Covid-19 can overwhelm health systems and put their workforces at risk. Indeed, Covid-19’s impact on frontline health workers is distressing. Some 1,700 health workers in Italy are known to have already been affected, decimating an overstretched health care workforce. There are similar stories from Spain, and the same worrisome situation seems to be developing in New York City and other places in the United States. Not only will this impede the treatment of patients inflicted with Covid-19, it will also affect the program to administer the eventual vaccine. This could be an especially big problem in low- to middle-income countries, where the depletion of health care workers’ ranks could also weaken existing programs to vaccinate people against other diseases. Investment in personal protective equipment and testing capacity is needed to protect the global frontline workforce.

Identifying residents of developing countries. Around 1 billion people in the world — predominantly residents of developing countries — lack formal identities; many are mobile. This presents a massive challenge for governments trying to reach a critical mass of dispersed people: Without reliable IDs, it’s difficult to know who has received vaccines. Furthermore, the initial Covid-19 vaccine supply will be limited, so it will be essential to verify each dose reaches a real patient. Corruption, leakage, and even accidental duplication waste precious supply and are deadly.

To address this problem, biometric digital IDs can be a game changer. For example, Simprints has deployed biometric IDs on health and humanitarian projects across 12 countries, which have increased health care visits and quality while preventing fraud. It is now partnering with Japanese telecom giant NEC to develop an affordable, interoperable, biometric solution for vaccines that can identify patients even in rural and offline settings. Using robust digital tools can help governments overcome identification barriers to ensure that everyone receives a Covid-19 vaccine.

Leveraging data to predict behavior. We need to understand risk of transmission at the hyperlocal level and the likelihood of adherence for specific geographies and sub-populations. In settings with limited individual-level health data, we will need to leverage available sources. For example artificial intelligence company Macro-Eyes uses satellite imagery, digital conversations, and publicly available data to predict with 76% accuracy which child will drop out of routine immunization programs.

Establishing reliable supply chains. Managing vaccine supply chains in developing countries is challenging. We need simple data-capture systems like that provided by Logistimo to understand the stock and flow of vaccines in the supply chain.

In addition, most vaccines need to be kept between two and eight degrees Celsius. However, in many low- and middle-income countries, electricity sources are unreliable. New technologies can help. Solar direct drive refrigerators, as well as efficient new ice-lined refrigerator technology, has revolutionized the cold chain in developing countries. Gavi has invested heavily in this area and has delivered more than 60,000 new pieces of cold-chain equipment in the last two years.

If the eventual Covid-19 vaccine is not thermostable, we must leverage innovations to ensure the vaccine remains potent all the way to the patient. For example, low-cost wireless remote temperature-monitoring solutions like those offered by Nexleaf Analytics have enabled multiple Gavi-supported countries to track vaccine temperatures in real time.

To achieve all the things we have described, global coordination will be required. At least for the first eight to 12 months after the Covid-19 vaccine becomes available, it is likely that there will be only a limited supply to meet global demand. Consequently, there needs to be a global agreement on allocating stocks to countries around the world. If that doesn’t happen, the result will be political tensions like those we are currently experiencing over the allocation of personal protective equipment, ventilators, and test kits.

Although the poorest countries have in place systems that have been well honed over 20 years through the Vaccine Alliance, middle-income countries ineligible for Gavi’s assistance do not.  We need to decide how to support them — whether to extend Gavi assistance to them or provide other mechanisms.

The time to prepare for globally distributing a Covid-19 vaccine in a way that is effective and equitable is now. It will have a long-term payoff by helping to prevent future pandemics, which scientists predict will be more common as the earth’s climate warms.

Hopes are soaring that a Covid vaccine is within reach, following news that an interim analysis has shown Pfizer/BioNTech’s candidate to have 90% efficacy in protecting people from transmission of the virus in global trials.

The vaccine performed much better than most experts had hoped for, according to the companies’ analysis, and brings into view a potential end to a pandemic that has killed more than a million people, battered economies and upended daily life worldwide.

The data is from an interim analysis and the trial continues into December but the headline results were emphatic. Regulators will be looking to process an emergency licence application at record speed.

Global stocks surged to record highs on the news, while companies that have become synonymous with lockdowns in the west, including Zoom’s video conferencing and food delivery firms, saw falls in their value.

John Bell, Regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, who is involved with the Oxford vaccine, said that the Pfizer team had shown “an amazing level of efficacy” and it could mean a return to normality by spring (efficacy connotes performance of the vaccine under the orderly conditions of a trial, as distinct from use in everyday life). “I’m the first guy to say that but I will say it with some confidence,” he told the BBC.

Manufacturing is already under way. Pfizer said they expect to supply globally up to 50m vaccine doses in 2020 and up to 1.3bn doses in 2021. Countries will decide who they prioritise for vaccination. In the UK, the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation has recommended that – presuming the vaccines work well enough in elderly people – the first vaccines go to care home workers and residents, followed by anybody over 80 and other health and social care workers. After that, people are expected to get them in decreasing age order.

The news comes too late to help Donald Trump’s re-election campaign in the US, but the vice-president, Mike Pence, tried to claim their administration’s Operation Warp Speed programme had helped the vaccine’s development. Pfizer denied the suggestion.

Covid vaccine tracker: when will a coronavirus vaccine be ready?
Read more
“We were never part of the Warp Speed,” Kathrin Jansen, a senior vice-president and the head of vaccine research and development at Pfizer, said in an interview. “We have never taken any money from the US government, or from anyone.”

BioNTech, the small biotechnology company that is the originator of the vaccine, was founded by two married German scientists, Uğur Şahin and Özlem Türeci, both born to Turkish immigrant parents, and the Austrian oncologist Christopher Huber. It originally set out to develop new types of immunotherapy for cancer, but has concentrated its capacities on the race for a Covid-19 vaccine.

There are so far no safety concerns around the vaccine, with the two companies reporting no serious side-effects. The high percentage of those protected makes it especially compelling. Regulators have previously said they would approve a vaccine that has just a 50% efficacy rate – protecting half of those who get vaccinated.

“Today is a great day for science and humanity. The first set of results from our phase 3 Covid-19 vaccine trial provides the initial evidence of our vaccine’s ability to prevent Covid-19,” said Dr Albert Bourla, the Pfizer chairman and chief executive.

“We are reaching this critical milestone in our vaccine development programme at a time when the world needs it most with infection rates setting new records, hospitals nearing over-capacity and economies struggling to reopen.”

Other scientists tried to marry caution with their obvious excitement at the early results, warning that the full data was not yet available and that the trial was continuing.

“In the absence of any data from Pfizer and BioNTech, we have to take these very exciting claims at face value,” said Dr Simon Clarke, an associate professor of cellular microbiology at the University of Reading. “It seems highly unlikely that a major pharmaceutical company would get such eagerly awaited news wrong.”

Prof Peter Horby of Oxford University, who runs the Recovery Covid drug trial, said it seemed like an important moment.

“This news made me smile from ear to ear,” he said. “It is a relief to see such positive results on this vaccine and bodes well for Covid-19 vaccines in general. Of course we need to see more detail and await the final results, and there is a long, long way to go before vaccines will start to make a real difference, but this feels to me like a watershed moment.”

As news of the breakthrough buoyed the scientific community, Brazil’s health regulator said it had suspended a clinical trial for China’s Sinovac coronavirus vaccine citing a severe adverse event. Trial organisers said there had been a death but it was unrelated to the vaccine.

The health regulator, Anvisa, said on Monday the “adverse event” took place on 29 October but did not specify if the incident took place in Brazil or in another country. It also did not give an indication of how long the suspension of the large late-stage trial might last.

Pfizer/BioNTech’s mRNA vaccine, which uses the genetic code rather than any part of the virus itself, has been one of the leaders in the global vaccine race. Interim results are also expected this month or in early December from trials for the Oxford University/AstraZeneca vaccine, which is based on a different technology.

The phase 3 trials have involved more than 43,000 people and are intended to establish whether the vaccine works. Volunteers are given either the Covid vaccine, which was administered in two shots about three weeks apart, or a placebo alternative such as the meningitis vaccine, and neither they nor their doctors know which they have had.

There have been concerns that black and minority ethnic populations are particularly vulnerable to Covid. Approximately 42% of global participants and 30% of US participants in the trials have racially and ethnically diverse backgrounds and appear to have been as well-protected as everyone else, the company says. But one important unanswered question is how long the vaccine will last.

The US and UK both welcomed the development but urged patience.

“I congratulate the brilliant women and men who helped produce this breakthrough and to give us so much cause for hope,” the US president-elect, Joe Biden, said. “It is also important to understand that the end of the battle against Covid-19 is still months away … a mask remains a more potent weapon against the virus than a vaccine. Today’s news does not change this urgent reality.”

The UK’s prime minister and deputy medical adviser warned that nobody should assume the pandemic was over and let down their guard. “We can’t let our enthusiasm run away with us,” said Boris Johnson, adding that the public must continue to observe the lockdown restrictions. Prof Jonathan Van-Tam said the results showed the vaccine prevented disease, but “we don’t know what this means yet for when we can get life back to normal … please don’t relax.”

Many countries already have orders for the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. The UK has bought 40m doses – enough for 20 million people because two doses are required. The EU has secured 200m doses, which it will distribute. The companies have a $1.95bn (£1.5bn) contract with the US government to deliver 100m vaccine doses beginning this year.

Low-income countries could face problems, however, because the vaccine needs ultra-cold chain; it must be stored at -70C. The BioNTech chief executive, Uğur Şahin, has said his company is researching whether the vaccine might be able to survive for up to five days at a normal fridge temperature of 4C.

In Germany, the government is planning to set up vaccination centres equipped with ultra-low-temperature freezers for the first phase of vaccinations.

Today, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued the first emergency use authorization (EUA) for a vaccine for the prevention of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in individuals 16 years of age and older. The emergency use authorization allows the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine to be distributed in the U.S.

“The FDA’s authorization for emergency use of the first COVID-19 vaccine is a significant milestone in battling this devastating pandemic that has affected so many families in the United States and around the world,” said FDA Commissioner Stephen M. Hahn, M.D. “Today’s action follows an open and transparent review process that included input from independent scientific and public health experts and a thorough evaluation by the agency’s career scientists to ensure this vaccine met FDA’s rigorous, scientific standards for safety, effectiveness, and manufacturing quality needed to support emergency use authorization. The tireless work to develop a new vaccine to prevent this novel, serious, and life-threatening disease in an expedited timeframe after its emergence is a true testament to scientific innovation and public-private collaboration worldwide.” 

The FDA has determined that Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine has met the statutory criteria for issuance of an EUA. The totality of the available data provides clear evidence that Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine may be effective in preventing COVID-19. The data also support that the known and potential benefits outweigh the known and potential risks, supporting the vaccine’s use in millions of people 16 years of age and older, including healthy individuals. In making this determination, the FDA can assure the public and medical community that it has conducted a thorough evaluation of the available safety, effectiveness and manufacturing quality information.

The Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine contains messenger RNA (mRNA), which is genetic material. The vaccine contains a small piece of the SARS-CoV-2 virus’s mRNA that instructs cells in the body to make the virus’s distinctive “spike” protein. When a person receives this vaccine, their body produces copies of the spike protein, which does not cause disease, but triggers the immune system to learn to react defensively, producing an immune response against SARS-CoV-2.    

“While not an FDA approval, today’s emergency use authorization of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine holds the promise to alter the course of this pandemic in the United States,” said Peter Marks, M.D., Ph.D., Director of the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. “With science guiding our decision-making, the available safety and effectiveness data support the authorization of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine because the vaccine’s known and potential benefits clearly outweigh its known and potential risks. The data provided by the sponsor have met the FDA’s expectations as conveyed in our June and October guidance documents. Efforts to speed vaccine development have not sacrificed scientific standards or the integrity of our vaccine evaluation process. The FDA’s review process also included public and independent review from members of the agency’s Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee. Today’s achievement is ultimately a testament to the commitment of our career scientists and physicians, who worked tirelessly to thoroughly evaluate the data and information for this vaccine.”

FDA Evaluation of Available Safety Data

Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine is administered as a series of two doses, three weeks apart. The available safety data to support the EUA include 37,586 of the participants enrolled in an ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled international study, the majority of whom are U.S. participants. These participants, 18,801 of whom received the vaccine and 18,785 of whom received saline placebo, were followed for a median of two months after receiving the second dose. The most commonly reported side effects, which typically lasted several days, were pain at the injection site, tiredness, headache, muscle pain, chills, joint pain, and fever. Of note, more people experienced these side effects after the second dose than after the first dose, so it is important for vaccination providers and recipients to expect that there may be some side effects after either dose, but even more so after the second dose. 

It is mandatory for Pfizer Inc. and vaccination providers to report the following to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) for Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine: all vaccine administration errors, serious adverse events, cases of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS), and cases of COVID-19 that result in hospitalization or death.

FDA Evaluation of Available Effectiveness Data 

The effectiveness data to support the EUA include an analysis of 36,523 participants in the ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled international study, the majority of whom are U.S. participants, who did not have evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection through seven days after the second dose. Among these participants, 18,198 received the vaccine and 18,325 received placebo. The vaccine was 95% effective in preventing COVID-19 disease among these clinical trial participants with eight COVID-19 cases in the vaccine group and 162 in the placebo group. Of these 170 COVID-19 cases, one in the vaccine group and three in the placebo group were classified as severe. At this time, data are not available to make a determination about how long the vaccine will provide protection, nor is there evidence that the vaccine prevents transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from person to person. 

The EUA Process

On the basis of the determination by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services on February 4, 2020, that there is a public health emergency that has a significant potential to affect national security or the health and security of United States citizens living abroad, and then issued declarations that  circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of unapproved products, the FDA may issue an EUA to allow unapproved medical products or unapproved uses of approved medical products to be used in an emergency to diagnose, treat, or prevent COVID-19 when there are no adequate, approved, and available alternatives. 

The issuance of an EUA is different than an FDA approval (licensure) of a vaccine. In determining whether to issue an EUA for a product, the FDA evaluates the available evidence and assesses any known or potential risks and any known or potential benefits, and if the benefit-risk assessment is favorable, the product is made available during the emergency. Once a manufacturer submits an EUA request for a COVID-19 vaccine to the FDA, the agency then evaluates the request and determines whether the relevant statutory criteria are met, taking into account the totality of the scientific evidence about the vaccine that is available to the FDA.

The EUA also requires that fact sheets that provide important information, including dosing instructions, and information about the benefits and risks of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine, be made available to vaccination providers and vaccine recipients.

The company has submitted a pharmacovigilance plan to FDA to monitor the safety of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. The pharmacovigilance plan includes a plan to complete longer-term safety follow-up for participants enrolled in ongoing clinical trials. The pharmacovigilance plan also includes other activities aimed at monitoring the safety profile of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine and ensuring that any safety concerns are identified and evaluated in a timely manner.

The FDA also expects manufacturers whose COVID-19 vaccines are authorized under an EUA to continue their clinical trials to obtain additional safety and effectiveness information and pursue approval (licensure).

The EUA for the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine was issued to Pfizer Inc. The EUA will be effective until the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of the emergency use of drugs and biologics for prevention and treatment of COVID-19 is terminated, and may be revised or revoked if it is determined the EUA no longer meets the statutory criteria for issuance.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.

Following the release of more data from its Covid-19 vaccine Phase 3 clinical trial, the drugmaker Pfizer said Wednesday that it expects to submit an application for what's called emergency use authorization to the Food and Drug Administration "within days."

Another drugmaker, Moderna, has also said it aims to submit an application in the coming weeks. Both companies have announced preliminary results from their vaccine trials showing extremely high levels of efficacy.

Full coverage of the coronavirus outbreak

Submitting emergency use authorization, or EUA, applications moves a potential coronavirus vaccine one step closer to patients, and experts say it's possible for Americans to start receiving shots by the end of December.

Generally, the path of a vaccine from its beginnings in a laboratory to a person's arm takes years to navigate. The speed with which manufacturers and regulators have moved this year is unprecedented.

"We are covering new territory. This has never been done before," Norman Baylor, president and chief executive of Biologics Consulting and former director of the Food and Drug Administration's Office of Vaccine Research and Review, said during a call Wednesday with reporters.

But shots won't be available right when the EUA application is submitted to the FDA, nor immediately after it is granted. Rather, following submission, drugmakers and federal health regulators must complete a series of actions before a vaccine is finally released to the public.

First, the EUA application will be reviewed by a group of advisors to the FDA called the Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee, or VRBPAC. This group is scheduled to meet on Dec. 8, 9 and 10, sources told CNBC, and will likely review Pfizer's application.

VRBPAC members are not employed by the FDA. They are independent experts, including scientists, physicians, infectious diseases experts and a consumer representative.

Download the NBC News app for full coverage of the coronavirus outbreak

It is possible the group will require any number of follow-up questions: What should happen with study participants who received the placebo? Should they now be offered the actual vaccine? Are children and pregnant women also protected? Might there be significant safety or manufacturing issues, given both the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines were developed using new technology called messenger-RNA, or mRNA?

If that group ultimately votes in favor of a vaccine, the FDA will consider whether to accept the advisory committee's recommendations and issue an EUA.

Next, an advisory committee to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention must make recommendations on which groups should be first in line to receive the vaccine. That group, called the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, or ACIP, has scheduled a preliminary meeting on potential Covid-19 vaccines this Monday, Nov. 23, though it does not plan on holding any votes then.

Similar to the FDA considering the VRBPAC's decision, the CDC will consider ACIP's recommendations. It's this step that's needed before people can get the vaccine.

Health officials expect that the first to receive any vaccine will be doctors and nurses on the front lines of treating patients, followed by the elderly and people with health problems that put them at greater risk for Covid-19 complications. It is thought that the general public will not be able to receive a vaccine until the spring or summer of 2021.

Dr. Paul Offit, a vaccine researcher at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, is a member of the VRBPAC.

On a call with reporters Wednesday, he recalled that other vaccine applications, such as the one for a rotavirus vaccine that he helped develop, took months to get through the entire process. Those, however, were full approval applications, rather than EUAs, which are meant to move much faster.

"This is going to happen in rapid succession, I suspect," Offit said, though he has not yet seen the full set of data from vaccine manufacturers.

Offit suggested the process could go quickly — from the FDA committee to the CDC committee within a 48-hour span.

"If I had to make a guess, I think this all happens in the first few weeks of December," Offit said.

Baylor, however, offered a measure of restraint. For example, a VRBPAC vote of 50-50 for and against could delay any vaccine rollout.

"We need to be careful," he said, "because there there are some things we cannot predict."

“None of us is safe until all of us are safe.”

This statement by United Nations Secretary General António Guterres sums up the momentous challenge ahead. As the world is still in the midst of the deadliest pandemic of the 21st century, with the number of cases still rising at the global level, immunization is our best chance of ending the pandemic at home and across the world — but only if all countries get access to the vaccine.

Covid-19 is wreaking havoc across the world, and no country will be spared its consequences, whether directly through loss of life and health, or indirectly through its impact on the economy, health services, education and many other parts of society. The pandemic is disproportionately affecting populations living in poverty and vulnerable situations.

Thankfully, great efforts, investment and coordination — largely facilitated by the World Health Organization (WHO) — are being directed at putting an end to the pandemic.

Vaccines are the most powerful public health tool and are critical for saving lives. Thanks to vaccines, we have seen good progress in reducing child mortality in recent decades.

At this point in time, with almost 200 potential covid-19 vaccine candidates currently at different stages of development, there is hope that soon one or more will prove to be both safe and effective. What happens next is equally important. This cannot be a race with one winner. When one or more vaccines are successful, it must be a win for all of us.

We cannot allow access to vaccines to increase inequalities within or between countries — whether low-, middle- or high-income. A future covid-19 vaccine can be instrumental in our commitment to achieve one of the key elements in the United Nations’ sustainable development goals: ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages.

However, manufacturing enough vaccines and doses to cover the whole global population will take time. While global cooperation in terms of resources, expertise and experiences is paramount for developing a vaccine, manufacturing and distributing it while leaving no one behind will truly put global cooperation to the test. But if we are successful, we can beat the virus and pave the way for recovery from the pandemic.

Therefore, we must urgently ensure that vaccines will be distributed according to a set of transparent, equitable and scientifically sound principles. Where you live should not determine whether you live, and global solidarity is central to saving lives and protecting the economy. A managed flow of the vaccine —including for humanitarian settings and other vulnerable countries such as the least developed countries and small island developing states — is the wise and strategic course of action and will benefit countries across the world.

Implementing an organized global flow of vaccines requires a strong multilateral mechanism ensuring mutual trust, transparency and accountability. A fair and effective vaccine allocation mechanism, guided by WHO advice and based on needs rather than means, should focus on saving lives and protecting health systems.

There are already local, regional and global initiatives to secure vaccine availability, including the important Covid-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility; we believe these initiatives should be coordinated and mutually reinforcing. We particularly recognize the WHO’s role as the leading global health agency, but also ongoing efforts by Gavi (the Vaccine Alliance) and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) as part of the vaccines pillar of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator. We also acknowledge the role of the International Vaccine Institute (IVI) in making vaccines available and accessible for vulnerable populations in developing countries and fully support the U.N. secretary general’s important leadership in ensuring a coordinated process.

A successfully managed vaccine distribution will also be a cornerstone of strengthening multilateralism for the future — as was the Security Council resolution on covid-19 drafted by France and Tunisia, demanding a global cease-fire in armed conflicts — and an important step toward coming back stronger together.

We call on global leaders to commit to contributing to an equitable distribution of the covid-19 vaccine, based on the spirit of a greater freedom for all.

As coronavirus cases surge in the United States and elsewhere, with little relief in sight, the world got good news on Monday. Pfizer and its partner, the German company, BioNTech, announced preliminary results that suggested their vaccine was more than 90 percent effective.

The news — the first results from any late-stage vaccine trial — buoyed stock markets and spirits as the public saw a glimmer of hope. But it’s worth noting that the news is still preliminary, and there is much that is still not known about how well the vaccine works.

And one thing remained clear: The vaccine will not come in time to rescue the world from the next several months, when the virus will take many more lives unless the public takes more stringent public health measures.

Here’s what we know, and don’t know, about the vaccine.

What did these scientists find out?
In July, Pfizer and BioNTech initiated a late-stage clinical trial on a coronavirus vaccine. Half of the people got the vaccine, while the other half got a placebo of salt water. The companies then waited for people to get sick to determine if the vaccine offered any protection.

So far, 94 participants out of nearly 44,000 have gotten sick with Covid-19. An independent board of experts looked at how many of those people got the vaccine, and how many got the placebo. That early analysis suggests the vaccine is over 90 percent effective.

As is standard for clinical trials, the data was “blinded,” meaning that no one except the independent board — not the volunteers, doctors, or the company’s top executives — knows how many of the 94 people sickened by the virus got the vaccine or the placebo. Given the estimate that the vaccine is over 90 percent effective, however, we can safely assume very few people who were vaccinated got Covid-19.

Is that a good result?
It is. The Food and Drug Administration had set a bar of 50 percent efficacy for vaccine makers who wanted to submit their candidates for emergency authorization. If the preliminary results from Pfizer and BioNTech bear out — and accurately reflect how the vaccine will work in the real world — then it’s far more protective than that.

To get a sense of how good these results are, it’s worth considering licensed vaccines that people regularly receive. On the low end, influenza vaccines are 40 to 60 percent effective at best, because the influenza virus keeps evolving into new forms year after year. By contrast, two doses of the measles vaccine are 97 percent effective.

The drugmaker Moderna said on Wednesday that it would soon begin testing its coronavirus vaccine in children ages 12 through 17. The study, listed Wednesday on the website clinicaltrials.gov, is to include 3,000 children, with half receiving two shots of vaccine four weeks apart, and half getting placebo shots of salt water.

But the posting says the study is “not yet recruiting,” and Colleen Hussey, a spokeswoman for Moderna, said it was not certain when the testing sites would be listed or start accepting volunteers. A link on the website to test centers is not yet working, and Ms. Hussey said she was not sure when it would become active.

Moderna announced on Monday that data from its study in 30,000 adults had found its vaccine to be 94.1 percent effective, and that it had applied to the Food and Drug Administration for emergency authorization to begin vaccinating adults. If approval is granted, certain groups of high-risk adults, including people in nursing homes, could receive shots late in December.

But no vaccine can be widely given to children until it has been tested in them. Vaccines meant for both adults and children are generally tested first in adults to help make sure they are safe for pediatric trials.

Moderna’s vaccine has not yet been studied in children or pregnant women. In the new clinical trial in adolescents, girls past puberty will be tested before each injection to make sure they are not pregnant.

“Everyone anticipates that when we test this first in adolescents, then older children, then the real small kids, that the Covid vaccine will work,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University and an adviser on vaccines to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

But children have more active immune systems than adults, and may have stronger reactions, including more fever, muscle and joint aches, and fatigue, Dr. Schaffner said.

“They may be more out of sorts than adults for a day or two,” he said. “You really do want to know, if it’s given in adolescents, what can parents expect? You really want to be able to tell them clearly how you might feel for 24 or 48 hours after you receive the vaccine. And obviously, we really want to be able to tell parents it works.”

If a child had intense side effects and parents were not prepared for it, they might be reluctant to go back for the second shot, Dr. Schaffner said.

Editors’ Picks

John Oliver and Seth Meyers: Looser but Less Pointed Onstage

Mark Linkous Died in 2010. His Final Album Is a Family Affair.

A Way to Feel the Music Through Your Skin
Dr. Paul A. Offit, a vaccine expert at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said that vaccines “for the most part” work equally well in children and adults. Occasionally, as with the hepatitis B vaccine, different doses are required, he said. Moderna will study the same dose in children that it has tested in adults.

Pfizer began testing its coronavirus vaccine in children as young as 12 in October. A large clinical trial found its vaccine to be 95 percent effective in adults, and the company has requested emergency authorization from the F.D.A. Britain approved the Pfizer vaccine for adults on Wednesday, the first country to do so.

AstraZeneca has also tested its vaccine in children, but not in the United States.

As vaccine studies have moved forward, rumors have spread on social media, particularly among people who oppose vaccines in general, that President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. plans to require vaccination for everyone, including children. His team has denied those claims, and Mr. Biden has said that he will rely on scientists’ advice for the best way to end the pandemic.

WASHINGTON — The coronavirus vaccine made by Pfizer and BioNTech provides strong protection against Covid-19 within about 10 days of the first dose, according to documents published on Tuesday by the Food and Drug Administration before a meeting of its vaccine advisory group.

The finding is one of several significant new results featured in the briefing materials, which include more than 100 pages of data analyses from the agency and from Pfizer. Last month, Pfizer and BioNTech announced that their two-dose vaccine had an efficacy rate of 95 percent after two doses administered three weeks apart. The new analyses show that the protection starts kicking in far earlier.

What’s more, the vaccine worked well regardless of a volunteer’s race, weight or age. While the trial did not find any serious adverse events caused by the vaccine, many participants did experience aches, fevers and other side effects.

“This is what an A+ report card looks like for a vaccine,” said Akiko Iwasaki, an immunologist at Yale University.

On Thursday, F.D.A.’s vaccine advisory panel will discuss these materials in advance of a vote on whether to recommend authorization of Pfizer and BioNTech’s vaccine.

Pfizer and BioNTech began a large-scale clinical trial in July, recruiting 44,000 people in the United States, Brazil and Argentina. Half of the volunteers got the vaccine, and half got the placebo.

New coronavirus cases quickly tapered off in the vaccinated group of volunteers about 10 days after the first dose, according to one graph in the briefing materials. In the placebo group, cases kept steadily increasing.

The vaccine’s swift impact could benefit not just the people who get it but the country’s strained hospitals, curbing the flow of new patients into intensive care units.

Despite the early protection afforded by the first dose, it’s unclear how long that protection would last on its own, underscoring the importance of the second dose. Previous studies have found that the second dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine gives the immune system a major, long-term boost, an effect seen in many other vaccines.

Editors’ Picks

John Oliver and Seth Meyers: Looser but Less Pointed Onstage

Mark Linkous Died in 2010. His Final Album Is a Family Affair.

A Way to Feel the Music Through Your Skin
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
The efficacy of the vaccine after the first dose is about 52 percent, according to Dr. William C. Gruber, senior vice president of Pfizer Vaccine Clinical Research and Development. After the second dose, that rises to about 95 percent. “Two doses of vaccine provide maximum protection,” he said.

Many experts have expressed concern that the coronavirus vaccines might protect some people better than others. But the results in the briefing materials indicate no such problem. The vaccine has a high efficacy rate in both men and women, as well as similar rates in white, Black and Latino people. It also worked well in obese people, who carry a greater risk of getting sick with Covid-19.

Some vaccines for other diseases set off a weak immune response in older adults. But Pfizer and BioNTech found that people over 65 got about as much protection from the coronavirus vaccine as younger people did.

“I found myself trembling reading this,” said Dr. Gregory Poland, a vaccine researcher at the Mayo Clinic, referring to the robust response of the vaccines in obese and older people. “This is a grand slam by any measure.”

Even if the vaccine is authorized by the F.D.A., the trial will continue. In the briefing documents, the companies said that they would encourage people to stay in the trial as long as possible, not knowing whether they got the vaccine or the placebo, so that the researchers could continue to collect information about whether the vaccine was safe and effective.

The briefing materials also provide a deeper look at the safety of the vaccine. In any large clinical trial, some people who get vaccines experience health conditions that have nothing to do with the vaccine itself. Comparing their rates of symptoms with those of the placebo group as well as with background rates in a population can point to symptoms that may actually be caused by a vaccine.

The F.D.A. concluded that there were no “meaningful imbalances” in serious health complications, known as adverse events, between the two groups. The agency noted that four people in the vaccinated group experienced a form of facial paralysis called Bell’s palsy, with no cases in the placebo group. The difference between the two groups wasn’t meaningful, and the rate in the vaccinated group was not significantly higher than in the general population.

The new Pfizer analysis revealed that many volunteers who received the vaccine felt ill in the hours after the second dose, suggesting that many people might have to request a day off work or be prepared to rest until the symptoms subside. Among those between ages 16 and 55, more than half developed fatigue, and more than half also reported headaches. Just over one-third felt chills, and 37 percent felt muscle pain. About half of those over age 55 felt fatigued, one-third developed a headache and about one-quarter felt chills, while 29 percent experienced muscle pain.

“Taking a day off after the second dose is a good thing to anticipate,” Dr. Iwasaki said.

On Monday, Kristen Choi, a psychiatric nurse and health services researcher at the University of California, Los Angeles, published a first-person account of the symptoms she experienced as a participant in the Pfizer-BioNTech trial, which included chills, nausea, headache and fever.

“Clinicians will need to be prepared to discuss with patients why they should trust the vaccine and that its adverse effects could look a lot like Covid-19,” Dr. Choi wrote in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine. She advised doctors to tell patients that these unpleasant symptoms were “a sign that the vaccine is working, despite the unfortunate similarities with the disease’s symptoms.”

The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine is one of several vaccines that can protect against COVID-19. Research indicates that the vaccine has high efficacy in people aged 16 and over.

This comes from the New England Journal of Medicine.

The Pfizer vaccine for COVID-19 is available in the United States and other countries. Side effects are typically mild and last a few daysTrusted Source.

Read on to learn more about the Pfizer vaccine, including how it works, ingredients, effectiveness, and safety.

The Pfizer vaccine is a shot that may protect people from developing COVID-19. Its brand name is Comirnaty.

Pfizer Inc., one of the world’s largest biopharmaceutical companies, and BioNTech, a German biotechnology company, created this vaccine.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), people receive this vaccine in two doses, with the second dose coming about 21 daysTrusted Source after the first. However, sometimes, a person may not receive the second dose until 6 weeks after the first.

How does the Pfizer vaccine work?
The vaccine works by introducing a molecule to cells, known as messenger RNA (mRNA). This molecule teaches cells to make a protein from the virus that causes COVID-19, which is SARS-CoV-2.

The body detects this protein and triggers an immune response. This creates antibodies, as well as longer lasting immunity that can fight off future SARS-CoV-2 infections.

Learn more about how mRNA vaccines work.

What does the vaccine contain?
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)Trusted Source state that the Pfizer vaccine contains:

mRNA
lipids ((4-hydroxybutyl)azanediyl)bis(hexane-6,1-diyl)bis(2-hexyldecanoate), 2[(polyethylene glycol)-2000]-N,N-ditetradecylacetamide, 1,2-Distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, and cholesterol)
monobasic potassium phosphate and dibasic sodium phosphate dehydrate, which act as buffers
potassium chloride and sodium chloride, which are types of salt
sucrose, or table sugar
It does not contain allergens, such as eggs, latex, or preservatives.

Who can have the Pfizer vaccine?
The FDA has authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine to prevent COVID-19 in people aged 12 years of age and olderTrusted Source.

Most adults will be eligible for this vaccine. However, some may need to avoid it for safety reasons.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source advise that people do not get the Pfizer vaccine if they have had a severe or immediate allergic reaction to any ingredient in an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, e.g., to polyethylene glycol (PEG) or polysorbate.

The CDC define an immediate allergic reaction as a reaction that takes place within 4 hours of exposure, causing symptoms such as:

hives
swelling
wheezing or difficulty breathing
People who have experienced allergic reactions to other vaccines should speak with a healthcare professional before getting a COVID-19 vaccine.

People should also speak with a doctor before getting the Pfizer vaccine if they have:

other allergies
a fever
a bleeding disorder or take medications to thin the blood
a compromised immune system or take medication that affects the immune system
are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding
have already received another COVID-19 vaccine

How effective is the Pfizer vaccine?
When considering the impact of the Pfizer vaccine, it is important to distinguish between its efficacy and its effectiveness.

“Efficacy” refers to the vaccine’s performance under ideal and controlled circumstances, such as in clinical trials. “Effectiveness” refers to its performance in real-world situations.

Efficacy
There is strong evidence from clinical trials that the Pfizer vaccine has a high level of efficacy.

A trial involving 43,548 participants, funded by BioNTech and Pfizer, reported that 2 doses of their vaccine confer 95% protection against COVID-19 in people aged 16 years and older.

Effectiveness
This result was consistent across age groups, sexes, races, ethnicities, and body weights, as well as those with underlying medical conditions and people who have already had a SARS-CoV-2 infection.

A large study on the Pfizer vaccine involving about 1.2 million people in Israel supports the findings of clinical trials. It indicates that two doses of the vaccine reduce symptomatic cases of COVID-19 by 94% across all age groups after 7 days of receiving the second dose. The vaccine also reduces severe illness by 92%.

What about new variants?
In some parts of the world, new variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus have emerged. While concerning, this is normal because viruses evolve over time.

It is likely that the Pfizer vaccine will still be effective against current variants. A preview of a paper that looks at one particular mutation, present in variants first identified in the United Kingdom and South Africa, suggests that the Pfizer vaccine still works against them.

Safety
Research to date indicates that the Pfizer vaccine is safe for those who are eligible for it. Its manufacturers developed the vaccine according to international safety standards, and the FDATrusted Source and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) have authorized it.

Side effects
Some people may experience temporary side effects after receiving the Pfizer vaccine, which may last a few daysTrusted Source. These include:

pain and swelling around the injection site
chills
fever
a headache
tiredness
Usually, these side effects indicate that the vaccine is working and are signs that the immune system is responding to it.

Less commonlyTrusted Source, people experience:

muscle pain
joint pain
nausea
swollen lymph nodes
allergic reactions
Side effects are more commonTrusted Source after the second dose than the first dose.

If a person experiences side effects after vaccination, they can take steps to care for themselves. Cool compresses and exercising the arm may ease pain and swelling while staying cool, and drinking fluids can help with a fever.

People can also discuss trying over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications, such as acetaminophen, with a doctor or pharmacist.

In rare cases, people can experience a severe allergic reaction up to 60 minutesTrusted Source after receiving the vaccine. Signs and symptoms include:

breathing difficulties
dizziness
rapid heartbeat
rash all over the body
swelling of the face and throat
weakness
Other rare side effectsTrusted Source following vaccination can include myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the tissue surrounding the heart). These side effects are more likely following the second dose of the vaccine.

If a person experiences any of the above symptoms, dial 911 or call a local emergency department immediately.

Safety during pregnancy
Based on how mRNA vaccines work, the CDCTrusted Source do not believe they pose a specific risk during pregnancy. However, there is currently limited evidence to confirm this.

Animal studies on the effects of the Pfizer vaccine found no direct or indirect risks to pregnancy or the health of the fetus. Another mRNA vaccine by Moderna had similar results.

In February 2021, Pfizer and BioNTech announced they would begin human trials, testing their COVID-19 vaccine on 4,000 healthy pregnant adult females. These trials are still ongoing.

If someone is unsure whether they should get the Pfizer vaccine due to being pregnant, they can discuss their concerns with a doctor. Some may be more comfortable waiting for the results of human trials, while others may want to get a vaccine as soon as they can.

COVID-19 does pose an increased risk of severe illness during pregnancy.

Learn more about how COVID-19 affects pregnancy here.

Comparison to other vaccines
Currently, people can access three COVID-19 vaccines in the U.S.: The Pfizer vaccine, the Moderna vaccine, or the Janssen’s Johnson & Johnson vaccine.

The Moderna and Pfizer vaccines have similar efficacy rates in clinical trials and involve receiving two shots several weeks apart. The Janssen vaccine is a single-dose shot.

Large-scale clinical trials are underway for two other COVID-19 vaccines from:

AstraZeneca
Novavax
The AstraZeneca vaccination has an efficacy of 63.09%Trusted Source against symptomatic COVID-19. It requires two doses, given 8–12 weeks apart. A longer interval in between doses has associations with greater efficacy.

Novavax reported that their COVID-19 vaccine candidate shows 89.3% efficacy in U.K. phase three trials. Research indicates that the vaccine efficacy might be 86%Trusted Source against the variant first identified in the U.K., and 60% against the variant first identified in South Africa.

Impact
The main benefit of getting a COVID-19 vaccine is protection from the disease, its symptoms, and its complications.

COVID-19 has a wide range of effects on the body. For some, it is a mild short-term illness. For others, it is severe and can be life threatening. Some people also go on to experience long COVID, which can last for weeks or months.

People who have received a vaccine may also be less likelyTrusted Source to transmit the virus that causes the COVID-19 to other people, reducing the risk of others getting sick, particularly vulnerable people.

Mass vaccination may also allow people to see their friends and family or go back to work sooner. However, no COVID-19 vaccine is 100% effective, so there is still some risk for those who receive a vaccine. Additionally, at present, scientists are unclear how long protection from vaccines lasts.

Even if a person has received two doses, they still needTrusted Source to follow safety guidelines for their local area, such as:

physical distancing
hand washing
wearing a mask

What happens if you do not get a vaccine?
Getting a vaccine is not compulsory. However, people who do not get a vaccine are at increased risk of developing COVID-19 than those who receive one.

Some people are unable to get a COVID-19 vaccine for health reasons. Other people may choose not to.

The FDATrusted Source state that it is an individual choice as to whether someone does or does not receive a COVID-19 vaccine. Choosing not to receive a vaccine will not impact their standard of medical care in the U.S.

People who do not get a vaccine should take care to follow safety guidelines to reduce the risk.

Summary
The Pfizer vaccine for the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, appears to be effective in clinical trials and real-world situations. Current evidence shows it is safe for most adults.

Common side effects include chills, fever, tiredness, headache, and pain or swelling at the injection site. This should only last a few days.

People can discuss different vaccines and their safety with a healthcare professional. People still need to wear masks, practice physical distancing, and follow hygiene guidelines to prevent transmission until advised otherwise.

While the new coronavirus, against which there is currently no vaccine, causes global economic chaos, illness and death, there are other serious infections that are too often ignored or dismissed. Experts say that, before the disruptions caused by Covid-19, most American parents were diligent about keeping their kids’ immunizations up-to-date, but too many others have rejected readily available, safe and effective vaccines that can protect their children against potentially life-threatening diseases.

A new report, using data from the 2014 National Immunization Survey, long before the novel coronavirus hit, found that more than a third of children in the United States do not get recommended vaccines in a timely fashion, leaving them vulnerable to preventable diseases they can spread to others who, for medical reasons, cannot safely be immunized.

Authors of the new report, published in the journal Pediatrics, wrote that only 58 percent of children ages 19 to 35 months were up-to-date with all immunizations recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, which participating doctors can administer free to the uninsured. And that figure does not include children who were behind on vaccines during their first year and a half of life, when the chances of severe consequences are greatest.

The committee recommends that children be vaccinated against 14 potentially serious illnesses by the age of 2.

As someone who suffered through all the infections that can now be prevented by vaccines, I believe parents who escaped them because they themselves were immunized should know that these ailments can be far worse than they may realize. As an 8-year-old, for example, I was kept in bed for two weeks with chickenpox, and despite daily oatmeal baths it left me with hundreds of scars well into my 20s. At least I was spared life-threatening infections of the lungs and brain.

But the next year I was rendered sleepless for days by mumps on both sides of my head. Still, I was lucky. I survived mumps without permanent damage. Not every child does. A male friend was unable to father children because mumps infected his testes and left him sterile. Mumps can also cause ovarian inflammation, hearing loss and potentially fatal meningitis and encephalitis.

Cases of measles are now on a precipitous climb. More measles cases were reported in this country for the first five months of 2019 than in any full year since 1992.

For the year as a whole, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported, there were 1,282 confirmed cases of measles, resulting in 128 hospitalizations and 61 serious complications, including pneumonia and encephalitis. This was more than triple the number of cases during 2018. The majority of infected people had not been vaccinated. In developed countries, one or two cases of measles in every 1,000 ends in death.

Since 2000, most cases of measles afflicted children whose parents refused measles vaccination, a review of 18 published studies showed.

Perhaps you recall the 2015 nationwide outbreak of measles that originated in Disneyland among nonimmunized children. The vaccination rates in affected communities were well below the numbers needed to create “herd immunity” and protect individuals who could not safely be immunized.

Pertussis, or whooping cough, is also on a frightening overall rise, both in cases and resulting deaths, especially in the last decade. In 1976, there were as few as 1,010 reported cases. But in 2012, the most recent peak year reported by the C.D.C., there were 48,277 cases (the largest number since the mid-1950s) and 18 deaths, almost all affecting infants. Half of babies with pertussis require hospitalization.

I’ll spare you further harrowing examples of complications that can accompany vaccine-preventable diseases. Suffice it to say that health professionals need to do a better job of countering the resistance of parents who refuse recommended immunizations for their children. While vaccination critics have existed for as long as there have been vaccines, the problem of widespread resistance in this country began with a 1982 documentary alleging adverse reactions to the diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine that minimized its benefits.

Then, 25 years later, the anti-vaccine movement was magnified by a falsified and later discredited report suggesting that the measles-mumps-rubella vaccine was causing an epidemic of autism. Further fueling vaccine resistance was parental concern that administration of multiple vaccines at one time to very young children was hazardous despite expert reassurance to the contrary.

As one specialist, Chephra McKee, told me, “Spreading out the vaccines means having to bring babies to the doctor or clinic multiple times, poking them over and over again and exposing them unnecessarily to sick children in the waiting room.”

So what now can be done to improve immunization rates? Dr. McKee, doctor of pharmacy at Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, wants health providers to be more open and willing to speak to parents about their vaccine concerns. Too often, she said, parents have told her “No one wants to listen to me about why I’m reluctant to vaccinate my child.”

For parents worried about the safety of vaccines, Dr. McKee said health providers should be educating them about the benefits of immunizations and risks involved in refusing to vaccinate their children.

In New York State, the rate of school vaccination exemptions for religious reasons increased sharply between 2000 and 2011, a study published in Pediatrics found.

While religious reasons account for the majority of vaccine refusals, the dramatic rise in these exemption claims suggests that religious freedom is often used as a “nebulous loophole” to get around school requirements that children be immunized, Dr. McKee and Kristin Bohannon wrote in the Journal of Pediatric Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

Dr. Saad B. Omer, director of the Yale Institute for Global Health, said more complex administrative procedures are needed to reduce the number of parents who refuse to have their children immunized for nonmedical reasons.

Before parents can claim such an exemption, he suggested in an interview, they should be required to provide a signed form showing that a doctor has counseled them on the risks of skipping immunizations not only for their children but also for their community.

“Parents should have to provide evidence that they know what they’re doing and recognize the implications of vaccine exemptions,” Dr. Omer said. Making it less convenient for parents to opt out of immunizations should enhance vaccination rates, he said.

Dr. Omer also suggested that physicians should be better trained in how to communicate factual information about vaccines to skeptical parents and that vaccine counseling should be covered by insurance even if it does not result in the administration of vaccines.

WASHINGTON — As nations around the world race to lock up coronavirus vaccines even before they are ready, the Trump administration on Wednesday made one of the largest investments yet, announcing a nearly $2 billion contract with Pfizer and a German biotechnology company for 100 million doses by December.

The contract is part of what the White House calls the Warp Speed project, an effort to drastically shorten the time it would take to manufacture and distribute a working vaccine. So far, the United States has put money into more than a half dozen efforts, hoping to build manufacturing ability for an eventual breakthrough.

Europe has a parallel effort underway. Germany recently took a 23 percent stake in a German firm, CureVac, that President Trump once tried to lure to American shores in hopes that its vaccine, if successful, would be distributed in the United States first. A European-led fund-raising effort in May brought $8 billion in pledges from the world’s governments, philanthropists and leaders for coronavirus vaccine research, even with the United States sitting out the conference.

China, meantime, has militarized the effort: Researchers associated with the Academy of Military Medical Sciences have developed one of China’s leading vaccine candidates, and another Chinese firm, Sinopharm Group, announced in June that it was beginning Phase 3 trials in the United Arab Emirates.

The Pfizer contract, an agreement to ensure the pharmaceutical giant has a market for its work, is the biggest splash yet by the Americans. No vaccine has yet been developed, and it is not clear whether the Pfizer version will work. But if the vaccine being produced by Pfizer and BioNTech, the German firm, proves to be safe and effective in clinical trials, the companies say they could manufacture those first 100 million doses by the end of the year.

Under the arrangement, the federal government would obtain that first batch for $1.95 billion, or about $20 a dose, with the rights to acquire up to 500 million more, or 600 million total. Americans would receive the vaccine for free. Before it could be distributed, it would need emergency approval by the Food and Drug Administration. But the U.S. government does not pay the nearly $2 billion until the drug is approved and the first 100 million doses are delivered.

Pfizer said that large-scale safety and efficacy trials were to begin this month, with regulatory review set for as early as October, although nothing was guaranteed.

“Depending on success in clinical trials, today’s agreement will enable the delivery of approximately 100 million doses of vaccine being developed by Pfizer and BioNTech,” Alex M. Azar II, the health secretary, said in a statement announcing the deal.

On Monday, Pfizer and AstraZeneca, a British-Swedish drug company developing a potential vaccine with Oxford University, released data suggesting that their vaccines could stimulate strong immune responses with only minor side effects.

But unlike AstraZeneca, which has also obtained funding from the U.S. government, Pfizer did not receive a contract for its earlier research and development efforts — only for the doses and their distribution.

By refusing funding up until now, Pfizer was able to avoid drawn-out contractual negotiations and get its vaccine to trials, company officials say.

“We didn’t accept the federal government funding solely for the reason that we wanted to be able to move as quickly as possible with our vaccine candidate into the clinic,” John Young, Pfizer’s chief business officer, said on Tuesday at a congressional hearing with executives from five vaccine manufacturers.

Pfizer and BioNTech are developing a vaccine candidate that uses genetic material from the virus, known as messenger RNA, to stimulate the immune system without making the recipient sick. The technology can create a vaccine quickly, but has not yet produced one that has been approved and marketed.

Moderna, a Massachusetts biotech company, received $483 million from the U.S. government for its vaccine development and is also using mRNA technology. By putting the might of an industry giant behind it, Pfizer is making the technology mainstream.

The lack of a track record has prompted some skepticism about this approach, but Dr. Kathrin Jansen, a senior vice president and the head of vaccine research and development at Pfizer, dismissed the criticism.

“That’s not a scientific mind-set — that just because it’s new, it will fail,” she said in an interview.

Earlier in her career, Dr. Jansen worked for Merck, where she led its development of a vaccine to prevent cervical cancer, which is caused by a virus. The vaccine, Gardasil, has been successful. It, too, used a technology that was new at the time and faced considerable skepticism.

Dr. Jansen said Pfizer had placed its bet on messenger RNA not just because the technology could produce a vaccine quickly, but also because its review of previous work by BioNTech on experimental cancer vaccines suggested the approach could cause a powerful immune response. Before the coronavirus pandemic, the two companies had been collaborating on flu vaccines.

Vaccines using mRNA consist of genetic material from part of the virus, encased in tiny particles made of fat that help it get into human cells. The messenger RNA then prompts the cells to churn out a tiny piece of the virus, causing the immune system to attack the real virus if the person is exposed. In essence, the patient’s cells become factories for a harmless fragment of the virus.

These vaccines set off several different kinds of immune responses, Dr. Jansen said, which is important because scientists do not know yet which type will be most potent against the coronavirus.

Dr. Jansen described making such a vaccine as a clean, fast process that required a relatively small footprint to produce many doses.

She added that it “has the potential to be fast to produce a product that is very well defined and very pure.”

Several other companies are also making such vaccines, and each has its own formulation of the genetic material and types of fat used to encase it.

The large vaccine studies set to begin this month will each include 30,000 people, with some getting placebo shots. The Food and Drug Administration has said that to be considered effective, a coronavirus vaccine should protect 50 percent of the people who receive it.

Companies hope to show proof of effectiveness by the fall, but that will depend on enrolling enough volunteers in areas where the infection rate is high enough to see a significant difference between the vaccinated people and the placebo group.

“We think we will see the end points, given that the infection rates are going up, up, up,” Dr. Jansen said. “If the stars are aligned, it could be next fall. But everything has to be right.”

Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious disease physician and senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security, said that Pfizer, unlike some smaller pharmaceutical companies that the government had contracted with, did not need research money because it was likely to have the infrastructure and early data it needed to speed its vaccine to trials without federal assistance.

“Pfizer is a company that has a lot of expertise in making vaccines,” he said. “They knew that any negotiation with the government could have delayed the start” of trials, which he said the company knew how to set up rapidly.

He added that the $1.95 billion agreement was a way to guarantee a market for the vaccine at the end of production, since prominent drugmakers have historically been hesitant to spend on infectious disease outbreaks.

“Advance purchase agreements have been one way we’ve been able to acquire vaccines and countermeasures against certain threats that pharmaceutical companies have traditionally stayed away from,” he said.

The agreement with Pfizer, which the company and the Department of Health and Human Services announced Wednesday morning, is the largest one yet for Operation Warp Speed. The federal government announced this month that it would pay the Maryland-based company Novavax $1.6 billion to expedite the development of a coronavirus vaccine.

“We’ve been committed to making the impossible possible by working tirelessly to develop and produce in record time a safe and effective vaccine to help bring an end to this global health crisis,” Dr. Albert Bourla, Pfizer’s chairman and chief executive officer, said in a news release.

A vaccine designed to target two different forms of Covid has been approved by the UK regulator for use as booster jabs in people over the age of 18.

Manufactured by the US firm Moderna, the vaccine targets not only the original coronavirus – as is the case for vaccines currently in use – but is designed specifically to target the Omicron variant BA.1, which fuelled a wave of Covid in the UK last winter.

The UK is the first country to approve the bivalent vaccine, known as “Spikevax bivalent Original/Omicron”.

It is now up to the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) to decide whether it will, as expected, be used in the planned autumn booster programme, expected to begin in September.

Dr June Raine, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) chief executive, said: “I am pleased to announce the approval of the Moderna bivalent booster vaccine, which was found in the clinical trial to provide a strong immune response against the Omicron BA.1 variant as well as the original 2020 strain.

“The first generation of Covid-19 vaccines being used in the UK continue to provide important protection against the disease and save lives. What this bivalent vaccine gives us is a sharpened tool in our armoury to help protect us against this disease as the virus continues to evolve.

“We have in place a comprehensive safety surveillance strategy for monitoring the safety of all UK-approved Covid-19 vaccines and this will include the vaccine approved today.”

Prof Sir Munir Pirmohamed, the chair of the Commission on Human Medicines, which independently reviewed the vaccine data, said the commission agreed with the MHRA’s decision.

“The virus, Sars-CoV-2, is continually evolving in order to evade the immunity provided by vaccines. This novel bivalent vaccine represents the next step in the development of vaccines to combat the virus, with its ability to lead to a broader immune response than the original vaccine,” he said.

The MHRA said an exploratory analysis of the bivalent vaccine had shown it generated a good immune response against the Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5. According to Moderna, trial participants who were given the booster had antibody levels against these subvariants that were 1.69 times higher than those given the original booster.

BA.4 and BA.5 fuelled the most recent Covid wave in the UK, and have caused infections, breakthrough reinfections, deaths and disruption around the world.

But Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London, suggested the vaccine may not offer huge gains in the fight against these subvariants.

“This is a really difficult juncture for all policymakers in terms of vaccine booster procurement and booster programmes,” he said.

“We lack the certainties we had in early 2020 of which way to go with the vaccines, not least, how to keep up with evolution of the variants. BA.5 is highly immune evasive so that even boosted people have highly impaired protection. Even exposure to the original Omicron sequence – as used in this, new, bivalent vaccine booster – only gives a rather marginal advantage to the antibody response.”

He said that meant the outlook was complex. “We’re in a terribly vulnerable position heading into the winter, so any booster programme is better than nothing, and this bivalent booster almost certainly an improvement over the first-generation vaccines.

“My view is that this approach offers a marginal improvement in our battle against BA.5, but actually, we still need to think harder about this and look more broadly at the diverse vaccine candidates. In the meantime, get boosted.”

Within the last couple of months, several scientific studies have come out — some peer-reviewed, others not — indicating that the antibody response of people infected with SARS-CoV-2 dropped significantly within two months. The news has sparked fears that the very immunity of patients with Covid-19 may be waning fast — dampening hopes for the development of an effective and durable vaccine.

But these concerns are confused and mistaken.

Both our bodies’ natural immunity and immunity acquired through vaccination serve the same function, which is to inhibit a virus and prevent it from causing a disease. But they don’t always work quite the same way.

And so a finding that naturally occurring antibodies in some Covid-19 patients are fading doesn’t actually mean very much for the likely efficacy of vaccines under development. Science, in this case, can be more effective than nature.

The human immune system has evolved to serve two functions: expediency and precision. Hence, we have two types of immunity: innate immunity, which jumps into action within hours, sometimes just minutes, of an infection; and adaptive immunity, which develops over days and weeks.

Almost all the cells in the human body can detect a viral infection, and when they do, they call on our white blood cells to deploy a defensive response against the infectious agent.

When our innate immune response is successful at containing that pathogen, the infection is resolved quickly and, generally, without many symptoms. In the case of more sustained infections, though, it’s our adaptive immune system that kicks in to offer us protection.

The adaptive immune system consists of two types of white blood cells, called T and B cells, that detect molecular details specific to the virus and, based on that, mount a targeted response to it.

A virus causes disease by entering cells in the human body and hijacking their genetic machinery so as to reproduce itself again and again: It turns its hosts into viral factories.

T cells detect and kill those infected cells. B cells make antibodies, a kind of protein that binds to the viral particles and blocks them from entering our cells; this prevents the replication of the virus and stops the infection in its tracks.

The body then stores the T and B cells that helped eliminate the infection, in case it might need them in the future to fight off the same virus again. These so-called memory cells are the main agents of long-term immunity.

The antibodies produced in response to a common seasonal coronavirus infection last for about a year. But the antibodies generated by a measles infection last, and provide protection, for a lifetime.

Yet it is also the case that with other viruses the amount of antibodies in the blood peaks during an infection and drops after the infection has cleared, often within a few months: This is the fact that has some people worried about Covid-19, but it doesn’t mean what it might seem.

That antibodies decrease once an infection recedes isn’t a sign that they are failing: It’s a normal step in the usual course of an immune response.

Nor does a waning antibody count mean waning immunity: The memory B cells that first produced those antibodies are still around, and standing ready to churn out new batches of antibodies on demand.

And that is why we should be hopeful about the prospects of a vaccine for Covid-19.

A vaccine works by mimicking a natural infection, generating memory T and B cells that can then provide long-lasting protection in the people who are vaccinated. Yet the immunity created by vaccines differs from the immunity created by a natural infection in several important ways.

Virtually all viruses that infect humans contain in their genomes blueprints for producing proteins that help them evade detection by the innate immune system. For example, SARS-CoV-2 appears to have a gene dedicated to silencing the innate immune system.

Among the viruses that have become endemic in humans, some have also figured out ways to dodge the adaptive immune system: H.I.V.-1 mutates rapidly; herpes viruses deploy proteins that can trap and incapacitate antibodies.

Thankfully, SARS-CoV-2 does not seem to have evolved any such tricks yet — suggesting that we still have an opportunity to stem its spread and the pandemic by pursuing a relatively straightforward vaccine approach.

Vaccines come in different flavors — they can be based on killed or live attenuated viral material, nucleic acids or recombinant proteins. But all vaccines consist of two main components: an antigen and an adjuvant.

The antigen is the part of the virus we want the adaptive immune response to react to and target. The adjuvant is an agent that mimics the infection and helps jump-start the immune response.

One beauty of vaccines — and one of their great advantages over our body’s natural reaction to infections — is that their antigens can be designed to focus the immune response on a virus’s Achilles heel (whatever that may be).

Another advantage is that vaccines allow for different kinds and different doses of adjuvants — and so, for calibration and fine-tuning that can help boost and lengthen immune responses.

The immune response generated against a virus during natural infection is, to some degree, at the mercy of the virus itself. Not so with vaccines.

Since many viruses evade the innate immune system, natural infections sometimes do not result in robust or long-lasting immunity. The human papillomavirus is one of them, which is why it can cause chronic infections. The papillomavirus vaccine triggers a far better antibody response to its viral antigen than does a natural HPV infection: It is almost 100 percent effective in preventing HPV infection and disease.

Not only does vaccination protect against infection and disease; it also blocks viral transmission — and, if sufficiently widespread, can help confer so-called herd immunity to a population.

What proportion of individuals in a given population needs to be immune to a new virus so that the whole group is, in effect, protected depends on the virus’s basic reproduction number — broadly speaking: the average number of people that a single infected person will, in turn, infect.

For measles, which is highly contagious, more than 90 percent of a population must be immunized in order for unvaccinated individuals to also be protected. For Covid-19, the estimated figure — which is unsettled, understandably — ranges between 43 percent and 66 percent.

Given the severe consequences of Covid-19 for many older patients, as well as the disease’s unpredictable course and consequences for the young, the only safe way to achieve herd immunity is through vaccination. That, combined with the fact that SARS-CoV-2 appears not to have yet developed a mechanism to evade detection by our adaptive immune system, is ample reason to double down on efforts to find a vaccine fast.

So do not be alarmed by reports about Covid-19 patients’ dropping antibody counts; those are irrelevant to the prospects of finding a viable vaccine.

Remember instead that more than 165 vaccine candidates already are in the pipeline, some showing promising early trial results.

And start thinking about how best to ensure that when that vaccine comes, it will be distributed efficiently and equitably.

The first large study of the safety and effectiveness of a coronavirus vaccine in the United States began on Monday morning, according to the National Institutes of Health and the biotech company Moderna, which collaborated to develop the vaccine.

A volunteer in Savannah, Ga., received the first shot at 6:45 a.m., Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said at a news briefing.

The study, a Phase 3 clinical trial, will enroll 30,000 healthy people at about 89 sites around the country this summer. Half will receive two shots of the vaccine, 28 days apart, and half will receive two shots of a saltwater placebo. Neither the volunteers nor the medical staff giving the injections will know who will get the real vaccine.

Researchers will then monitor the subjects, looking for side effects. And their main goal will be to see if significantly fewer vaccinated people contract Covid-19, to determine whether the vaccine can prevent the illness. The study will also try to find out if the vaccine can avert severe cases of Covid and death; if it can block the infection entirely, based on lab tests; and if just one shot can prevent the illness.

A second company, Pfizer, announced late Monday afternoon that it had also begun a late-stage study of a coronavirus vaccine. Pfizer has been working with a German company, BioNTech. Their study will also include 30,000 people, from 39 states in the United States, and from Brazil, Argentina and Germany.

The first subjects received injections at the University of Rochester on Monday.

The government announced last week that it had reached a $1.95 billion deal to buy 100 million doses of Pfizer’s vaccine by the year’s end, but only if the trial proves it safe and effective.

More on the Coronavirus Pandemic
An Uptick in Cases: Echoing patterns in prior years, coronavirus infections are slowly ticking up in parts of the United States, the harbinger of a possible fall and winter wave. Here is what to know.
A New Variant: EG.5 is now the dominant Covid variant in the United States. How worried should people be about it? Here is what experts say.
Covid’s Origins: More than three years into the coronavirus pandemic and untold millions of people dead, we still don’t know how it started. Here's what we do know — and why it matters.
U.S. Vaccine Program: A $5 billion federal program aims to make better Covid vaccines. But bureaucratic hassles and regulatory uncertainty are complicating efforts to arm the United States against future pandemics.
Dr. Fauci estimated that the full enrollment of 30,000 people in the Moderna trial would be completed by the end of the summer, and that results might be available by November. Findings might emerge even earlier, he said, but added that he doubted it. He said that the high rates of transmission in some parts of the country, though unfortunate, would help speed up the process of determining whether the vaccine works.

Dr. Mark Mulligan, the director of the NYU Langone Vaccine Center in New York, which will begin giving injections of the Pfizer vaccine on Tuesday, said he thought that full enrollment would take two months, and that it would take four to six months to determine whether the vaccine worked.

Over all, a total of 150 to 160 coronavirus infections in the study will be enough to determine whether the Moderna vaccine is acceptably effective — that is, if it protects 60 percent of those who receive it, Dr. Fauci said.

Ideally, he would like the figure to be higher, but he said 60 percent “would be a major, huge step at controlling this outbreak; we’ll take that amount.”

Dr. Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health, said the U.S. government was reaching out to groups hit hardest by Covid — older people, those with chronic diseases, Blacks, Latinx and Native Americans — to encourage them to participate in the study. He said that the pandemic had put health disparities into “sharp relief” and that extra efforts were needed to gain the trust of people in those groups who might be reluctant to sign up for a medical experiment.

Earlier tests of Moderna’s vaccine showed that it stimulated a strong immune response, with minor and transient side effects like sore arms, fatigue, achiness and fever. But exactly what type of immune response is needed to prevent the illness is not known, so Phase 3 studies are essential to determine whether a vaccine really works.

In a statement, Dr. Collins said, “Having a safe and effective vaccine distributed by the end of 2020 is a stretch goal, but it’s the right goal for the American people.” He said that despite the unprecedented speed in bringing this experimental vaccine to human testing, “the most stringent safety measures” were being maintained.

Moderna said in a statement that it would be able to deliver about 500 million doses a year, and possibly up to a billion doses per year, starting in 2021. The Massachusetts-based company, which has received nearly $1 billion from the federal government to develop a coronavirus vaccine, has said it will not sell the vaccine at cost, but for profit.

Moderna has not said what it will charge. “We will price it responsibly during the pandemic, to make sure it is broadly accessible,” a spokesman, Ray Jordan, said in an email. The company may change the price later, when the virus becomes endemic, “but that is not something we have settled at this time,” Mr. Jordan said.

Moderna shares were up more than 9 percent on Monday.

Pfizer has also said it would sell its product at a profit; the contract with the government works out to about $20 a shot, and people will need two.

Both the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines use a synthetic version of genetic material from part of the coronavirus, encased in tiny particles made of fat that help it get into human cells. The genetic material, called messenger RNA or mRNA, then prompts the cells to churn out a tiny piece of the virus, which the immune system sees as foreign and learns to recognize. If the person is later exposed to the real virus, the immune system will attack it.

Messenger RNA has not yet produced any approved vaccines, but other companies have also invested in the approach, because of its potential to produce vaccine quickly. CureVac and Sanofi are also working on mRNA vaccines.

At the news briefing, Dr. Collins said that three more Phase 3 trials would be starting soon, each needing 30,000 patients. Those trials will involve vaccines made by Novavax, Johnson & Johnson and a collaboration of the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca. All three companies are part of the Trump administration’s Operation Warp Speed. Pfizer is not.

Social media platforms were flooded this week with concerns about an alarming headline purporting that the Pfizer-BioNTech coronavirus vaccine, which is expected to be cleared for emergency use this week, could cause infertility in women. But experts say these claims are baseless.

“It’s a myth, it’s inaccurate — there’s no evidence to support their perception,” said Saad Omer, a vaccine expert at Yale University. Expert agencies that oversee the clearance of vaccines for use in people, he added, “have a rigorous process” to weed out products that might cause such disastrous effects. “And when things happens, action is taken,” Dr. Omer said.

This week, the Food and Drug Administration reiterated its confidence in data showing that the vaccine can protect people against developing Covid-19 without causing serious side effects. Pfizer’s vaccine has been given green lights in Britain and Canada.

The rumors about infertility were fueled by an article published by a blog called Health and Money News, which falsely claimed that Pfizer’s vaccine contained ingredients capable of “training the female body to attack” a protein that plays a crucial role in the development of the placenta.

The unfounded claims were drawn from a petition co-written by Dr. Michael Yeadon, a retired British doctor and former Pfizer employee who has previously been criticized for his misleading views on the coronavirus. Dr. Yeadon has downplayed the severity of the pandemic in Britain and publicly aired his grievances about the futility of investing in vaccines.

But experts say there is no evidence to back up the infertility claim.

The key ingredient in Pfizer’s vaccine (as well as a similar vaccine made by Moderna that is also rapidly on its way to emergency clearance) is genetic material that instructs human cells to make a coronavirus protein called spike. The production of this protein teaches the body to fight off the coronavirus. There are no placental proteins, or genetic material that instructs the manufacture of placental proteins, in Pfizer’s vaccine, said a company spokeswoman, Jerica Pitts.

The misleading blog piece drew a comparison between coronavirus spike and a type of placental protein. The similarities were strong enough, it contended, that a vaccine could dupe the immune system into confusing the two proteins and attacking the placenta.

But Stephanie Langel, an immunologist and expert in maternal and neonatal immunity at Duke University, pointed out that coronavirus spike and the placental protein in question have almost nothing in common, making the vaccine highly unlikely to trigger a reaction to these delicate tissues. The two proteins share only a minuscule stretch of material; mixing them up would be akin to mistaking a rhinoceros for a jaguar because they are wearing the same collar.

Dr. Langel also pointed out that the human body has evolved to quash immune reactions that might harm its own tissues.

“If we didn’t have that, we wouldn’t even make it past Day 1 of life,” she said.

Pfizer pointed to a recent study that found the coronavirus did not seem to raise the risk for pregnancy-related problems.

“There are no data to suggest that the Pfizer BioNTech vaccine candidate causes infertility,” the company said in an emailed statement.

Dr. Langel and Dr. Omer both noted that researchers would continue to monitor the well-being of vaccinated people as Pfizer’s products and others are rolled out around the world. There remains a dearth of data in people who are pregnant, Dr. Langel said. But baseless discussions about how vaccines could cause infertility, she added, were “particularly damaging” to the scientifically backed efforts to protect people with vaccines.

Ten years ago, my father-in-law fell 13 feet from the top of his tractor-trailer. Only after completing his delivery, driving 35 miles home and showering, did he finally go to the emergency department. Although he had five broken ribs and a lung contusion, he was discharged. He returned to the doctor with difficulty breathing, but it would take several visits (during which symptoms were dismissed and test results misinterpreted) to diagnose fluid around his lungs and heart. He required surgery and suffered a post-operative cardiac arrest. His survival is a miracle.

Throughout, our family remained vigilant about my father-in-law’s medical care. We carefully observed his interactions with providers to ensure his pain was adequately treated, symptoms taken seriously and discharge instructions explained well. We are Black and know these standards are not always guaranteed for us. I am a doctor and have seen Black patients treated with disrespect; their concerns and symptoms dismissed.

I reflected on this complex relationship between racism and mistrust as I considered whether to take the Covid-19 vaccine. As an emergency medicine physician with regular exposure to Covid-19 patients, I knew I would be prioritized for vaccination. However, for many months, I was decidedly and definitely against being among the first to get the shot. Instead, I planned to wait and see how others did with the vaccine. I suppose I am wary of the very system to which I have dedicated nearly two decades of my career.

To be clear, I am not a vaccine skeptic — my three children are fully vaccinated and I dutifully take my flu shot year after year. But I had serious doubts about the speed of the Covid-19 vaccine development process, which seemed to me to be a political tool then-President Donald Trump was trying to use to win re-election. How could a vaccine developed under a president who displayed repeated acts of racism and who actively enabled white supremacist groups be trusted? Across the country, many Americans are wrestling with similar concerns.

And yet, on Dec. 17, 2020, I received my first dose of the vaccine.

Here is what helped change my mind. First, I had to educate myself about how the vaccine had been created. The mRNA technology behind the Covid-19 vaccine has been under development for decades. Yes, its compressed timeline was aided by governmental funding, but the vaccine was worked on by thousands of scientists, underwent a rigorous three-phase clinical trials process, and was approved by two federal advisory boards (the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Also, seeing photographs of Kizzmekia Corbett, a Black scientist at the heart of Moderna’s vaccine development, in her lab was powerful. Representation matters and is critical to repairing centuries of structural racism that contributes to medical mistrust.

Second, I read the experiences of people of color and trusted Black physicians who participated in vaccine trials. Reading their thought processes, how they weighed risks and benefits, and what their symptoms were after the second dose helped me envision taking the vaccine. Never doubt the power of social media and the written word to influence behavior.

Third, my mom practically begged me to get the vaccine. Since March, she’s been hearing my own terrifying stories about Covid-19 patients. The tears of a young woman with only mild symptoms, who worried about exposing her elderly father in their small home. The middle-aged, healthy health care worker who came in gasping for air; the fear in her eyes as we talked about the need for intubation. She survived. Many did not.

Still, I was undecided until the Pfizer trial was published. The graph from that study showing the continued rise of Covid-19 infection in the placebo group compared to the near complete drop-off in those who received the vaccine will forever be imprinted on my mind. In addition to being a physician, I am a scientist. And while the historical examples of experimentation on Black bodies in the name of science are too numerous to count, and concerns about racism and bias in research persist, I still trust rigorous science. I was almost ready to say yes.

My final concern was the risk of a rare, severe and yet undocumented long-term side effect of the vaccine. The Pfizer study only followed people for two months. But I was reassured to learn that, for vaccines generally, adverse reactions most commonly occur in the first days to weeks after vaccination. I weighed these unknowns against the risks of contracting the coronavirus — death, a prolonged hospital stay or, and perhaps most convincing to me, the increasingly documented lingering, and not rare, long-term complications from Covid-19 itself: brain fog, difficulty breathing, extreme fatigue, depression.

The choice became clear. I would get the vaccine.

I didn’t feel well for three days after my second Covid-19 shot. I had a fever, body aches and headaches for 24 hours; then fatigue. Motrin and Tylenol helped with my symptoms, which were a small inconvenience to gain the freedom of finally being able to work in the emergency department without fear.

Let’s normalize hesitancy to take a new vaccine. Shaming people who have questions will not encourage uptake. Skepticism is especially salient for Black people, for whom centuries of mistreatment and harm from systems meant to serve and protect have engendered mistrust.

Health systems and public health agencies rushing to address vaccine hesitancy among Black people must first acknowledge their own role in creating and perpetuating mistrust. The goal should then be, in partnership with Black people, to create forums for conversation and opportunities to have questions answered in nonjudgmental ways by trusted messengers.

I am concerned that the underrepresentation of Black people among those who have received the vaccine so far will lead to a further widening of racial disparities in Covid-19 infection and death rates. And so I share my journey from “no” to “yes,” my own #BlackWhysMatter, with whoever will listen, to allay fears and open doors for conversation. I want to help people make informed decisions.

And if you’re wondering, yes, my father-in-law just signed up for his vaccine.

‘This is a very historic milestone, a monumental step forward,” President Biden declared last week after the Food and Drug Administration authorized Pfizer and Moderna vaccines for toddlers. “The United States is now the first country in the world to offer safe and effective Covid-19 vaccines for children as young as 6 months old.”

In fact, we don’t know if the vaccines are safe and effective. The rushed FDA action was based on extremely weak evidence. It’s one thing to show regulatory flexibility during an emergency. But for children, Covid isn’t an emergency. The FDA bent its standards to an unusual degree and brushed aside troubling evidence that warrants more investigation.

As it initially did for adults, the FDA granted the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines for toddlers an emergency-use authorization allowing the agency to expedite access for products that “prevent serious or life-threatening diseases or conditions.” While adult Covid vaccines clearly met this standard in late 2020, the toddler vaccines don’t.

Only 209 kids between 6 months and 4 years old have died from Covid—about 0.02% of all virus deaths in the U.S. About half as many toddlers were hospitalized with Covid between October 2020 and September 2021 as were hospitalized with the flu during the previous winter. More children were hospitalized during the Omicron wave last winter, but hospitalization rates were still roughly in line with the 2019-20 flu season. None of the 5,400 or so toddlers in Moderna’s trial were hospitalized for Covid. Yet at least 15 were hospitalized for non-Covid infections.

The two children in Pfizer’s trial who got sickest with Covid also tested positive for other viruses. It’s possible that many hospitalizations attributed to Covid this winter were actually instigated or exacerbated by other viruses. Doctors had warned that more “immunologically naive” children were likely to get sick once schools reopened and lockdowns were lifted.

Evidence supporting the efficacy of Moderna and Pfizer vaccines in adults, at least at the time they were approved, was also far stronger. Both trials were large and robust enough to demonstrate 95% efficacy against infection with a strong degree of certainty. By contrast, the FDA authorized the vaccines for toddlers based on a comparison of the antibodies they generated to the original Wuhan variant with those in young adults who had received two doses. But two doses offer little if any protection against Omicron infection in adults, and even protection against hospitalization is only around 40% to 60%.

At least Moderna’s trial showed modest efficacy against symptomatic Omicron infection—37% among 2- to 5-year-olds and 51% for those 6 months to 2 years old. Pfizer claimed its vaccine was 80% effective, but this is misleading. For one, Pfizer contravened numerous clinical-trial conventions. Its initial protocol involved only two doses, but this failed to generate the antibody levels required for FDA approval. So Pfizer added a third dose, which the FDA generously allowed. Usually the agency won’t let drugmakers make a course correction when a trial ends in failure.

Pfizer then planned to track at least 21 cases to establish a bare-bones measure of efficacy. By comparison, Moderna tracked more than 250 cases. Yet Pfizer truncated its data collection on April 29—the day after Moderna announced it had submitted its application for emergency-use authorization—even though a mere 10 cases had been recorded after the third dose. It’s hard not to conclude that Pfizer cut corners to avoid getting beaten by Moderna. But as a result too few cases were documented to measure with any degree of confidence Pfizer’s vaccine efficacy. Pfizer nonetheless proclaimed its vaccine was 80% effective. Moderna scientists must be seething. A Pfizer spokesperson says the FDA was more interested in vaccine “immunogenicity” data than efficacy among toddlers and will do another efficacy analysis after more cases accrue.

More troubling, vaccinated toddlers in Pfizer’s trial were more likely to get severely ill with Covid than those who received a placebo. Pfizer claimed most severe cases weren’t “clinically significant,” whatever that means, but this was all the more reason that the FDA should have required a longer follow-up before authorizing the vaccine.

Also worrisome: Most kids who developed multiple infections during the trial were vaccinated. This warranted more investigation, since experimental vaccines for other diseases sometimes increase susceptibility to infection.

Scientists are also discovering that triple-vaccinated adults who were previously infected with the Wuhan variant have a weaker immune response to Omicron, leaving them more susceptible to reinfection. This phenomenon, called “immunological imprinting,” could explain why children who received three Pfizer shots were more likely to get reinfected.

The FDA brushed aside the risk that inoculating infants against a variant no longer circulating could blunt their immune responses to Omicron and its offshoots. There’s a reason vaccine trials usually take a decade. Some steps can be accelerated, but an extended follow-up is often necessary to ensure potential side effects aren’t overlooked.

The FDA standard for approving vaccines in otherwise healthy people, especially children, is supposed to be higher than for drugs that treat the sick. But the FDA conspicuously lowered its standards to approve Covid vaccines for toddlers. Why? Perhaps it felt pressure from the White House as well as anxious parents. White House Covid response coordinator Ashish Jha repeatedly told parents that he expected vaccines for toddlers would be approved and available in June. Recall how Mr. Biden accused Donald Trump of pressuring the FDA to rush Covid vaccine approvals by suggesting they could be available before the November 2020 election.

Mr. Biden’s hypocrisy is hard to stomach. The FDA, to its credit, accelerated Covid treatments and vaccines when they were desperately needed. But children would have been better off had the FDA taken more time to ensure the vaccines really are safe and effective, even if this meant that America wouldn’t be first.

Ms. Finley is a member of the Journal’s editorial board.

The excitement and enthusiasm for a COVID-19 vaccine by the end of 2020 is both palpable and understandable. We all hope for a rapid end to the pandemic and an effective vaccine would be a surefire solution. But there are risks that come with a fast-tracked vaccine delivered end of this year, not the least of which are the risks related to the safety of the vaccine itself.

Telescoping testing timelines and approvals may expose all of us to unnecessary dangers related to the vaccine. While preclinical trials to evaluate the potential safety and efficacy of vaccine candidates are likely to include tens of thousands of patients, it is still unclear whether that number will be large enough and a trial will last long enough to evaluate safety for a drug that would be administered to so many. The US alone plans to vaccinate hundreds of millions of people with the first successful candidate. One serious adverse event per thousand of a vaccine given to 100 million people means harm to 100,000 otherwise healthy people.

Aside from questions of safety that attend any vaccine, there are good reasons to be especially cautious for COVID-19. Some vaccines worsen the consequences of infection rather than protect, a phenomenon called antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE). ADE has been observed in previous attempts to develop coronavirus vaccines. To add to the concern, antibodies typical of ADE are present in the blood of some COVID-19 patients. Such concerns are real. As recently as 2016, Dengavxia, intended to protect children from the dengue virus, increased hospitalizations for children who received the vaccine.

Questions also arise around the efficacy of a potential vaccine. The little we know of the current generation of COVID-19 vaccines raises serious questions regarding their ability to protect people from infection. We know all the candidates tested to date in non-human primates failed to protect any of the monkeys from infection of the nasal passages, the primary route of human infection. Failure to protect entirely from infection fits with all we know about attempts to protect monkeys from two other deadly coronaviruses, those that cause SARS and MERS.

On a brighter note, at least some of the candidate vaccines did raise significant immune responses. How that translates to protection of humans is uncertain though as monkeys do not become noticeably ill or exhibit many of the life-threatening consequences of COVID-19, even when exposed to high doses of the virus via the nose, lung, and rectum simultaneously. As many of the most serious COVID symptoms do not appear until late in the disease course, sometimes four to five weeks following exposure, there is a possibility that we will not have sufficient time to judge efficacy of a new vaccine, even by the lower standard of symptom amelioration.

An effective COVID-19 vaccine also faces several hurdles beyond our control. The older we get the poorer our ability to respond to vaccines. Resistance to vaccination begins early at age 30 and becomes progressively more profound with time. That is especially troubling as those over 60 are the population most at risk. Vaccination of the elderly may sometimes succeed by administering repeated doses and by increasing the potency of the vaccine with powerful adjuvants. But these adjuvants can be especially risky for the very old.

It seems a folly then to rush our way towards a vaccine in 2020 if it is likely to have only limited benefit to the population most in need and may put otherwise healthy people at risk. The risk goes far beyond the dangers a COVID vaccine alone may hold. Public support for vaccines in general is already an issue. Trust in other lifesaving vaccines will be eroded even further if a COVID vaccine goes wrong and many more people—children especially—will be at risk if vaccination rates fall.

Yes, we are all increasingly longing for an end to the outbreak. But a safe vaccine, effective for all those at risk, is worth the wait, especially when we have other solutions in hand. We already know from the experience of countries in Asia that the epidemic can be stopped in its tracks with basic public health measures: widespread testing, contact tracing, and mandatory controlled quarantine—not necessarily in a dismal public health facility as many imagine, but in our own homes with virtual supervision or in a hotel environment. These efforts alone could bring new infections down to almost zero within just weeks.

In addition, I believe it will be possible before the end of this year to protect those most at risk from exposure with combinations of monoclonal antibodies or with truly effective antiviral drugs. These drugs could treat those who were ill and prevent further infection. In addition to pursuing a vaccine within a realistic timeframe, we should also be throwing our weight behind these other types of medical solutions which have historically been much quicker to bring to market safely.

There is no doubt we need an urgent end to the pandemic. Economies around the world are crashing. Governments are piling up trillions of dollars in debt. And, in the US alone, tens of millions are without work or income. But there are still costs that are too great, even when compared to such numbers. When we have solutions to the pandemic in hand we cannot risk the potential lives lost of rushing a COVID vaccine to market. We must hold dear the central dictum of the medical community, first, do no harm. Trust that given the time science will deliver a medical solution in the form of a vaccine or a chemoprophylactic drug treatment, and in the meantime let us immediately implement the public health strategies that we know will work today to drive new infections down to nothing.

Read more about the coronavirus outbreak from Scientific American here. And read coverage from our international network of magazines here.

Executives from four companies in the race to produce a coronavirus vaccine — AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson, Moderna Therapeutics and Pfizer — told lawmakers on Tuesday that they are optimistic their products could be ready by the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021. All four companies are testing vaccines in human clinical trials.

Three of the firms — AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Moderna — are getting federal funds for their vaccine development efforts. AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson pledged to the lawmakers that they would produce hundreds of millions of doses of their vaccines at no profit to themselves. Moderna, however, which has been granted $483 million from the government to develop its product, made no such promise.

“We will not sell it at cost,” said Dr. Stephen Hoge, the president of Moderna.

Many Democratic lawmakers have argued that federal funding for vaccine development should include provisions to guarantee affordability and guard against profiteering.

At the Congressional hearing on Tuesday, some House members raised concerns about Pfizer’s decision to reject federal funds, suggesting it could lead to price-gouging and a lack of transparency.

“We didn’t accept the federal government funding solely for the reason that we wanted to be able to move as quickly as possible with our vaccine candidate into the clinic,” said John Young, Pfizer’s chief business officer.

“We’ll price our potential vaccine consistent with the urgent global health emergency that we’re facing,” Mr. Young said, adding that “a vaccine is meaningless if people are unable to afford it.”

Representative Dr. Raul Ruiz, Democrat of California, also questioned whether failing to address the financial stakes of vaccine development early on could keep these products out of “the hands of the people that need this most.”

“I don’t want to look back, and then have health equity be an afterthought,” Dr. Ruiz said. “It has to be prioritized.”

The hearing held by members of the House energy committee’s oversight panel was punctuated by notes of optimism from executives from each company, several of whom referred to promising early results from studies in people. On Monday, AstraZeneca and Pfizer released data indicating that their vaccines could stimulate strong immune responses with only minor side effects.

Editors’ Picks

‘If I Go Missing’ Folders for the (Very Unlikely) Possibility That You Do

Lily Allen’s Second Act

An Even Better Way to Eat Eggs
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Still, the actual effectiveness and durability of these responses against the virus have yet to be determined. No vaccine candidates have been proven effective for preventing infection by the coronavirus, or for protecting people from the severe effects of Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.

Panel members pressed the company executives for a commitment to maintain the highest standards for a vaccine, and not sacrifice quality for the sake of expediency. An ideal vaccine, several committee members stressed, would not only be safe and effective, but also be straightforward enough to manufacture en masse and available to the public at low cost.

“It is possible that a Covid-19 vaccine may become available by the end of this year or early next year,” said Representative Diana DeGette, Democrat of Colorado and the panel’s chairperson. “That’s a rare bit of good news in this harrowing time.”

But, she added, “we must remind ourselves that plenty can still go wrong. And so the anticipated timeline is not guaranteed.”

A fifth contender, Merck, painted a far less rosy picture of the vaccine development landscape. Dr. Julie Gerberding, the company’s executive vice president and chief patient officer, made no promises about when its product would be ready, citing concerns about safety should the process be rushed. “We do not expect to be able to accelerate the safety assessment,” Dr. Gerberding said.

Merck’s chief executive, Kenneth Frazier, has previously cautioned against coronavirus vaccine hype and warned that a hurried approval process could damage prospects for protecting the public.

In a statement released on June 30, the Food and Drug Administration noted that any vaccine candidate vying for approval would need to prevent or ameliorate disease in at least 50 percent of the people who received it. Manufacturers won’t have a good sense of these metrics until the completion of so-called Phase 3 clinical trials, which enroll thousands of participants — some of whom are vaccinated, some of whom aren’t — and track their infection status over the course of multiple months.

Federal approval isn’t the only goal of vaccine development, the executives said. Once this milestone is met, the vaccines will still need to be administered widely and also be accessible to a range of populations particularly those that have been disproportionately affected by the virus. Those would include the elderly, people with underlying medical conditions and Black, Latino and Native Americans.

In written statements to the panel, AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer reaffirmed their commitment to diversity in their vaccine development pipelines to ensure that these vulnerable communities will also benefit from their products.

Dr. Macaya Douoguih, who is head of clinical development and medical affairs of Johnson & Johnson’s Janssen Vaccines, said at the hearing that her company would be leveraging its past experience with community outreach, noting the importance of equipping higher-risk populations with accurate information about the disease.

And Dr. Hoge, of Moderna, said that his company is actively enrolling people “representative of the diversity of America” into Phase 3 trials.

The subcommittee also stressed the importance of worldwide distribution of any vaccines proven effective against the coronavirus to ensure global health.

“None of us are safe until all of us are safe,” Mr. Young said.

Carl Zimmer and Noah Weiland contributed to this article.

Health authorities are investigating the case of a Florida doctor who died from an unusually severe blood disorder 16 days after receiving the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine.

Dr. Gregory Michael, a 56-year-old obstetrician and gynecologist in Miami Beach, received the vaccine at Mount Sinai Medical Center on Dec. 18 and died 16 days later from a brain hemorrhage, his wife, Heidi Neckelmann, wrote in a Facebook post.

Shortly after receiving the vaccine, Dr. Michael developed an extremely serious form of a condition known as acute immune thrombocytopenia, which prevented his blood from clotting properly.

In a statement, Pfizer, the maker of the vaccine, said it was “actively investigating” the case, “but we don’t believe at this time that there is any direct connection to the vaccine.”

“There have been no related safety signals identified in our clinical trials, the post-marketing experience thus far,” or with the technology used to make the vaccine, the company said. “Our immediate thoughts are with the bereaved family.”

About nine million people in the United States have received at least one shot of either the Pfizer or Moderna coronavirus vaccine, the two authorized in the United States. So far, serious problems reported were 29 cases of anaphylaxis, a severe allergic reaction. None were reported as fatal. Many people have had other side effects like sore arms, fatigue, headache or fever, which are usually transient.

Local and federal agencies are investigating Dr. Michael’s death. Several experts said the case was highly unusual but could have been a severe reaction to the vaccine.

The Florida Department of Health referred Dr. Michael’s death to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for investigation. Kristen Nordlund, a C.D.C. spokeswoman, said in a statement that the agency would “evaluate the situation as more information becomes available and provide timely updates on what is known and any necessary actions.”

The Miami-Dade County medical examiner’s office is still investigating Dr. Michael’s death and has not yet completed an autopsy report or identified a cause of death, Darren J. Caprara, a spokesman, said.

Mount Sinai Medical Center declined to comment, citing patient privacy laws.

According to Ms. Neckelmann, three days after her husband got the vaccine, he developed tiny reddish spots, or petechiae, caused by bleeding under the skin of his hands and feet. Recognizing the spots as a danger sign, he went to the emergency room. A blood test showed the level of his platelets, a blood component essential for clotting, to be at zero, she wrote, and he was admitted into the intensive care unit with a diagnosis of acute immune thrombocytopenia.

Dr. Michael had “absolutely no medical issues” and no underlying conditions, Ms. Neckelmann, who declined to be interviewed by phone as she made funeral preparations, said in a text message to The New York Times. “Never had any reaction to any medication nor vaccines.” Her husband, she added, was a healthy, active person who did not smoke or take any medication.

“He was an avid deep sea fisherman and mostly a family man,” she said. “He never got Covid because he used an N95 mask from the beginning of the pandemic. He was adamant in protecting his family and patients.”

He also believed in the promise of the vaccine, she wrote on Facebook.

For two weeks, doctors tried to raise Dr. Michael’s platelet count, and “experts from all over the country were involved in his care,” she wrote on Facebook.

“He was conscious and energetic through the whole process, but two days before a last-resort surgery, he got a hemorrhagic stroke caused by the lack of platelets that took his life in a matter of minutes,” she wrote.

The planned surgery would have removed Dr. Michael’s spleen, an operation that can sometimes help treat the clotting disorder.

Ms. Neckelmann said she told her husband’s story to make people aware of the vaccine’s possible “side effects,” and “that it is not good for everyone, and in this case destroyed a beautiful life, a perfect family, and has affected so many people in the community.”

Dr. Jerry L. Spivak, an expert on blood disorders at Johns Hopkins University, who was not involved in Dr. Michael’s care, said that based on Ms. Neckelmann’s description, “I think it is a medical certainty that the vaccine was related.”

“This is going to be very rare,” said Dr. Spivak, an emeritus professor of medicine. But he added, “It happened and it could happen again.”

Even so, he said, it should not stop people from being vaccinated.

The condition Dr. Michael developed, acute immune thrombocytopenia, occurs when the immune system attacks a patient’s own platelets, or attacks the cells in the bone marrow that makes platelets. Covid itself can cause the condition in some patients.

A long list of medicines, including quinine and certain antibiotics, can also cause the disorder in some people. Dr. Spivak described the reactions as “idiosyncratic,” meaning they strike certain individuals without rhyme or reason, possibly based on unknown genetic traits, and there is no way to predict if someone is susceptible.

“If you vaccinate enough people, things will happen,” he said.

Vaccines stimulate the immune system, and in theory could, in rare cases, cause it to mistakenly identify some of a patient’s own cells as enemy invaders that should be destroyed.

Dr. Spivak said several things made the vaccine the mostly likely suspect in Dr. Michael’s case. The disorder came on quickly after the shot, and was so severe that it made his platelet count “rocket” down — a pattern like that in some cases brought on by drugs such as quinine. In addition, Dr. Michael was healthy and young, compared with most people who develop chronic forms of the ailment from other causes. Finally, most patients — 70 percent — are women. A sudden case in a man, especially a relatively young, healthy one, suggests a recent trigger.

Dr. Paul Offit, an expert in vaccines and infectious diseases at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said that the measles vaccine and measles itself have been known to cause this same clotting problem, but it is usually transient and not serious. It occurs in about one of every 25,000 measles shots, in both children and adults, he said.

Regarding Dr. Michael’s case, Dr. Offit said: “I don’t know what this is. We’ll keep our eyes open and see if it happens to anybody else.” He added, “Right now we’re guessing. It’s an association in time, but not necessarily a causal association.”

Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University, said that although the platelet disorder had been linked to certain drugs, its connection to vaccines was “a big question mark.”

He noted that millions of vaccinations of many types are given each year, and clusters of this platelet disorder do not occur.

Dr. Spivak said that there were multiple therapies for immune thrombocytopenia, and that knowing more about Dr. Michael’s case might help doctors devise better treatment plans in case the disorder occurs in other people after they are vaccinated.

Alain Delaquérière contributed to this article.

Two health care workers at the same hospital in Alaska developed concerning reactions just minutes after receiving Pfizer’s coronavirus vaccine this week, including one staff member who was to remain hospitalized until Thursday.

Health officials said that the cases would not disrupt their vaccine rollout plans and that they were sharing the information for the sake of transparency.

The first worker, a middle-aged woman who had no history of allergies, had an anaphylactic reaction that began 10 minutes after receiving the vaccine at Bartlett Regional Hospital in Juneau on Tuesday, a hospital official said. She experienced a rash over her face and torso, shortness of breath and an elevated heart rate.

Dr. Lindy Jones, the hospital’s emergency department medical director, said the worker was first given a shot of epinephrine, a standard treatment for severe allergic reactions. Her symptoms subsided but then re-emerged, and she was treated with steroids and an epinephrine drip.

When doctors tried to stop the drip, her symptoms re-emerged yet again, so the woman was moved to the intensive care unit, observed throughout the night, then weaned off the drip early Wednesday morning, Dr. Jones said.

Dr. Jones had said earlier Wednesday that the woman was set to be discharged in the evening, but the hospital said late Wednesday that she was remaining another night.

The second worker received his shot on Wednesday and developed eye puffiness, lightheadedness and a scratchy throat 10 minutes after the injection, the hospital said in a statement. He was taken to the emergency room and treated with epinephrine, Pepcid and Benadryl, although the hospital said the reaction was not considered anaphylaxis. The worker was back to normal within an hour and released.

The hospital, which had administered 144 total doses as of Wednesday night, said both workers did not want their experiences to have a negative impact on others lining up for the vaccine.

“We have no plans to change our vaccine schedule, dosing or regimen,” Dr. Anne Zink, Alaska’s chief medical officer, said in a statement.

Editors’ Picks

‘If I Go Missing’ Folders for the (Very Unlikely) Possibility That You Do

Lily Allen’s Second Act

An Even Better Way to Eat Eggs
Although the Pfizer vaccine was shown to be safe and about 95 percent effective in a clinical trial involving 44,000 participants, the Alaska cases will likely intensify concerns about possible side effects. Experts said the developments may prompt calls for tighter guidelines to ensure that recipients were carefully monitored for adverse reactions.

Dr. Paul A. Offit, a vaccine expert and member of an outside advisory panel that recommended the Food and Drug Administration authorize the Pfizer vaccine for emergency use, said the appropriate precautions were already in place. For instance, he said, the requirement that recipients remain in place for 15 minutes after getting the vaccine helped ensure the woman was quickly treated.

“I don’t think this means we should pause” vaccine distribution, he said. “Not at all.” But he said researchers need to figure out “what component of the vaccine is causing this reaction.”

Dr. Jay Butler, a top infectious-disease expert with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the Alaska situation showed that the monitoring system worked. The agency has recommended that the vaccine be administered in settings that have supplies, including oxygen and epinephrine, to manage anaphylactic reactions.

Millions of Americans are in line to be inoculated with the Pfizer vaccine by the end of the year. As of Wednesday night, it was unclear how many Americans so far have received it. Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, said his department would be releasing that data “several days or maybe a week into this.”

The Alaska woman’s reaction was believed to be similar to the anaphylactic reactions two health workers in Britain experienced after receiving the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine last week. Like her, both recovered.

Those cases are expected to come up on Thursday, when F.D.A. scientists are scheduled to meet with the agency’s outside panel of experts to decide whether to recommend that regulators approve Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine for emergency use.

Although the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines are based on the same type of technology and similar in their ingredients, it is not clear whether an allergic reaction to one would occur with the other. Both consist of genetic material called mRNA encased in a bubble of oily molecules called lipids, although they use different combinations of lipids.

Dr. Offit said that in both vaccines, the bubbles are coated with a stabilizing molecule called polyethylene glycol that he considered a “leading contender” for triggering an allergic reaction. He stressed that more investigation was needed.

Pfizer’s trial did not find any serious adverse events caused by the vaccine, although many participants did experience aches, fevers and other side effects. The Alaska reactions were assumed to be related to the vaccine because they occurred so quickly after the shot.

A Pfizer spokeswoman, Jerica Pitts, said the company did not yet have all of the details of the Alaska situation but was working with local health authorities. The vaccine comes with information warning that medical treatment should be available in case of a rare anaphylactic event, she said. “We will closely monitor all reports suggestive of serious allergic reactions following vaccination and update labeling language if needed,” Ms. Pitts said.

After the workers in Britain fell ill, authorities there warned against giving the vaccines to anyone with a history of severe allergic reactions. They later clarified their concerns, changing the wording from “severe allergic reactions” to specify that the vaccine should not be given to anyone who has ever had an anaphylactic reaction to a food, medicine or vaccine. That type of reaction to a vaccine is “very rare,” they said.

Pfizer officials have said the two British people who had the reaction had a history of severe allergies. One, a 49-year-old woman, had a history of egg allergies. The other, a 40-year-old woman, had a history of allergies to several medications. Both carried EpiPen-like devices to inject themselves with epinephrine in case of such a reaction.

Pfizer has said that its vaccine does not contain egg ingredients.

The British update also said that a third patient had a “possible allergic reaction,” but did not describe it.

In the United States, federal regulators issued a broad authorization for the vaccine on Friday to adults 16 years and older. Health care providers were warned not to give the vaccine to anyone with a “known history of a severe allergic reaction” to any component of the vaccine, which they said was a standard warning for vaccines.

But because of the British cases, F.D.A. officials have said they would require Pfizer to increase its monitoring for anaphylaxis and submit data on it once the vaccine comes into further use. Pfizer also said the vaccine was recommended to be administered in settings that have access to equipment to manage anaphylaxis. Last weekend, the C.D.C. said people with serious allergies could be safely vaccinated, with close monitoring for 30 minutes after receiving the shot.

Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening, with impaired breathing and drops in blood pressure that usually occur within minutes or even seconds after exposure to a food or medicine, or even a substance like latex to which the person is allergic.

A Boston physician said he developed a severe allergic reaction minutes after receiving Moderna’s coronavirus vaccine on Thursday, in the first week of the nationwide rollout for the company’s shots.

The case was the first of its kind reported to be linked to Moderna’s vaccine. Federal agencies are investigating at least six cases involving people who suffered anaphylaxis after receiving the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, which contains similar ingredients, during the first few weeks of its distribution in the United States.

Officials with the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had discussed the reactions involving some of the Pfizer cases, but have not determined whether an ingredient in the vaccine caused the allergic responses. A few health care workers in Britain had also experienced anaphylaxis after receiving the Pfizer vaccine earlier this month.

The incident on Thursday involved Dr. Hossein Sadrzadeh, a geriatric oncologist at Boston Medical Center, who has a severe shellfish allergy and had an appointment to get the Moderna shot in the afternoon. In an interview, Dr. Sadrzadeh said he experienced a severe reaction almost immediately after he was inoculated, feeling dizzy and with his heart racing.

In a statement, David Kibbe, a spokesman for Boston Medical Center, confirmed that Dr. Sadrzadeh had received Moderna’s vaccine on Thursday. The statement said that Dr. Sadrzadeh “felt he was developing an allergic reaction and was allowed to self-administer his personal EpiPen. He was taken to the Emergency Department, evaluated, treated, observed and discharged. He is doing well today.”

Ray Jordan, a spokesman for Moderna, said on Thursday evening that the company could not comment publicly on an individual case. On Friday, Mr. Jordan added that the company’s medical safety team would look into the matter, and he referred further questions to officials at Operation Warp Speed, the federal program overseeing vaccine distribution.

The F.D.A. would not comment on the new report on Friday.

Tom Skinner, a spokesman for the C.D.C., said that information on reactions to the new vaccines would be posted to the agency’s website starting next week. Belsie González, a spokeswoman for the C.D.C., referred further questions to local public health authorities.

With more than 1.1 million injections already delivered to arms across the country, severe allergic reactions remain a rarity, and should not prompt concern in most people, said Dr. Merin Kuruvilla, an allergist and immunologist at Emory University. “This should not deter people who are not obviously at increased risk,” she said.

After the initial cases accompanying the Pfizer shots, the C.D.C. issued advice that the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines might not be appropriate for people with a history of anaphylaxis to ingredients in either injection. Anaphylaxis, which typically happens within minutes after exposure to a triggering substance, can impair breathing and cause precipitous drops in blood pressure, potentially becoming life-threatening.

The agency recommended that people with other allergies should still get their shots and wait the standard 15 minutes post-injection before leaving the vaccination site. Anyone who previously had an anaphylactic reaction to a substance, including another vaccine or injectable drug, should be monitored for an extra 15 minutes.

In the case on Thursday, Dr. Sadrzadeh said he brought his EpiPen to his vaccine appointment because of his serious allergies. He said that within minutes of the vaccine injection at 3:30 p.m., his heart rate had spiked to 150 beats per minute, about twice its normal cadence; his tongue prickled and went numb. Before long, he was drenched in a cold sweat and found himself feeling dizzy and faint. His blood pressure also plummeted, he said.

His immune system, he realized, was in revolt.

“It was the same anaphylactic reaction that I experience with shellfish,” Dr. Sadrzadeh said.

Dr. Sadrzadeh used his EpiPen and was taken on a stretcher to the emergency room, where he was given several medications, including steroids and Benadryl, to calm the immune reactions that had overtaken his body. A record of his visit stated that he had been “seen in the ER for shortness of breath, dizziness, palpitations and numbness after receiving the Covid-19 vaccine.”

Four hours later, Dr. Sadrzadeh was released from care. As of Friday morning, he said he felt fully recovered. But the previous day’s events shook him. “I don’t want anybody to go through that,” he said.

Dr. Sadrzadeh reported his reaction to both Moderna and a national vaccine safety surveillance system run by the F.D.A. and the C.D.C.

The vaccines developed by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna are the only ones that have been authorized for emergency use so far during the coronavirus pandemic, with mostly health care workers receiving top priority for immunization.

Moderna’s vaccine, like Pfizer’s, is designed around a molecule called messenger RNA, or mRNA, that’s injected into the upper arm. Once inside human cells, the mRNA instructs the manufacture of a protein called spike, which then teaches the immune system to recognize and thwart the coronavirus, should it ever invade the body. Each vaccine contains a handful of other ingredients that sheath the fragile mRNA in a protective greasy bubble and help keep the recipe stable in transit.

None of the ingredients in either vaccine have been identified as common allergens. But several experts have cautiously pointed to polyethylene glycol, or PEG, which appears in both recipes, albeit in slightly different formulations, as a possible culprit. PEG is found in a bevy of pharmaceutical products, including ultrasound gel, laxatives and injectable steroids, and allergies to it are extremely rare.

Dr. Kuruvilla said it remained possible that something else was responsible, and more investigation was needed to nail down the cause of this smattering of events.

Dr. Kimberly Blumenthal, an allergist and immunologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, noted that anaphylaxis can sometimes be difficult to confirm without blood work that hunts for an enzyme called tryptase, which is released during allergic reactions. It’s essential, she added, for there to be protocols in place so similar cases can be investigated further.

According to data filings from its late-stage clinical trials, Moderna did not report any links between its vaccine and anaphylaxis. But when products emerge from closely monitored studies into broad distribution, rare side effects can occur.

The recent allergic reactions linked to Pfizer’s very similar vaccine prompted heated discussions during advisory panel discussions held this month by the F.D.A. and the C.D.C., with experts noting that anaphylaxis seemed to be occurring at an unusual frequency so soon into distribution. (Under normal circumstances, allergic reactions to vaccines are thought to occur at a rate of about one in a million.)

Not long after the new coronavirus first surfaced last December, an ambitious prediction was made: A vaccine would be available within 12 to 18 months, and it would stop the pandemic.

Despite serious challenges — how to mass manufacture, supply and deliver a vaccine worldwide — the first prong of that wish could well be fulfilled. Eight vaccine candidates are undergoing large-scale efficacy tests, so-called Phase 3 trials, and results are expected by the end of this year or early 2021.

But even if one, or more, of those efforts succeeds, a vaccine might not end the pandemic. This is partly because we seem to be focused at the moment on developing the kind of vaccine that may well prevent Covid-19, the disease, but that wouldn’t do enough to stop the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19.

Doctors usually explain vaccines to patients and the parents of young children by describing how those protect us from a particular disease: An attenuated form of a pathogen, or just a bit of it, is inoculated into the human body in order to trigger its immune response; having learned to fight off that pathogen once, the body will remember how to fend off the disease should it be exposed to the same pathogen later.

A vaccine’s ability to forestall a disease is also how vaccine developers typically design — and how regulators typically evaluate — Phase 3 clinical trials for vaccine candidates.

Yet the best vaccines also serve another, critical, function: They block a pathogen’s transmission from one person to another. And this result, often called an “indirect” effect of vaccination, is no less important than the direct effect of preventing the disease caused by that pathogen. In fact, during a pandemic, it probably is even more important.

That’s what we should be focusing on right now. And yet we are not.

Stopping a virus’s transmission reduces the entire population’s overall exposure to the virus. It protects people who may be too frail to respond to a vaccine, who do not have access to the vaccine, who refuse to be immunized and whose immune response might wane over time.

The benefits of this approach have been demonstrated with other pathogens and other diseases.

The Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) conjugate vaccines were designed, and licensed in the early 1990s, to prevent young children from developing serious infections such as meningitis. Soon enough an unexpected and welcome side benefit became clear: The vaccine interrupted the bacterium’s transmission; after its introduction, occurrences of the disease dropped also in groups that had not been vaccinated.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines were developed to prevent cervical cancer and genital warts in women. They have proved immensely effective among the women to whom they are administered — and up to 50 percent effective at preventing genital warts among unvaccinated men, according to a 2017 study of the health insurance records for 2005-10 of some nine million people in Germany.

To understand why this is the case, remember what it takes for you to become ill from a pathogen, be it a virus or a bacterium.

First, you are exposed to it. Then it infects you. While you are infected, you may infect others. In some cases, the infection develops into a disease. In other cases, it doesn’t: Though infected, you remain asymptomatic.

One way that vaccines can interrupt a pathogen’s transmission cycle is by preventing the pathogen from causing an infection in the first place. This is how many common vaccines — against measles, mumps, rubella and chickenpox — operate.

Other vaccines — like the ones against meningococcal meningitis or pneumonia brought on by the pneumococcus bacterium — can block the transmission of the pathogen by interfering with the infection or by decreasing either the quantity of pathogen that the infected patient sheds or the duration of the shedding period.

Some recipients of the pneumococcal pneumonia vaccine simply don’t get infected with the bacterium; others do get infected and carry the bacterium in their nose, but in smaller amounts and for shorter periods of time than if they had not been vaccinated.

Much still needs to be learned about precisely how such mechanisms work — what part do antibodies play? T cells? — but the upshot from these examples is this: Vaccines can block the transmission of viruses or bacteria, and they can do so in several ways.

Given the communitywide benefits of accomplishing that, especially in a pandemic, current vaccine-development efforts should prioritize finding vaccines that limit the transmission of SARS-CoV-2.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has stated that preventing a SARS-CoV-2 infection is in itself a sufficient endpoint for the Phase 3 trials of vaccine candidates — that it is an acceptable alternative goal to preventing the development of Covid-19. The World Health Organization has said that “shedding/transmission” is as well.

These guidelines are an important signal, especially considering that the F.D.A. has never approved a vaccine based on its effects on infection alone; instead, the agency has focused exclusively on the vaccine’s effectiveness at disease prevention.

And yet vaccine developers do not seem to be heeding this new call.

Based on our review of the Phase 3 tests listed at ClinicalTrials.gov, a database of trials conducted around the world, the primary goal in each of these studies is to reduce the occurrence of Covid-19.

Four of the six Covid-19 vaccine trials for which information is available say they will also evaluate the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infections among subjects — but only as an ancillary outcome.

This approach is shortsighted: One cannot assume that a vaccine that prevents the development of Covid-19 in a patient will necessarily also limit the risk that the patient will transmit SARS-CoV-2 to other people.

For example, a study of young Australian teenagers published in the New England Journal of Medicine early this year found that the vaccine used to prevent the diseases caused by the B strain of meningococcus in children and teenagers “had no discernible effect” on the presence of the relevant bacterium in the throats of vaccinated subjects displaying no symptoms.

The inactivated polio vaccine prevalent in many developed countries today, known as IPV, is highly effective at protecting individuals against polio. But it is far less effective at reducing viral shedding, at least in fecal excretions, than the oral vaccine, known as OPV, used more widely in other parts of the world.

In the late 1990s, the United States, like other wealthy countries, replaced with an acellular vaccine the killed-whole-cell pertussis vaccine it had previously used against whooping cough. A resurgence of whooping cough already was underway, but it accelerated then: Although the new vaccine was better than the previous one at protecting the inoculated from the disease, it was less good at blocking transmission of the bacterium that causes the cough.

Conversely, a vaccine that, let’s say, offers older adults only modest protection against developing a disease might nonetheless be very effective, when administered to healthy adults or children, at curbing a pathogen’s transmission in a population overall.

This is the case with the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. A 2015 study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the vaccine reduced the occurrence of pneumonia in inoculated adults age 65 or older by only about 45 percent. Yet, according to a study last year by researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Stanford University, the immunization of infants and toddlers reduced ninefold the incidence of pneumococcal disease in the elderly.

With some vaccines, for some diseases, the indirect benefits of vaccination can be greater than the direct effects.

Based on these precedents, it could be a grave mistake for vaccine developers now to hew only, or too closely, to the single-minded goal of preventing Covid-19, the disease.

Doing so could mean privileging vaccines that don’t block the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 at all, or abandoning vaccines that block transmission well enough but that, by prevailing standards, are deemed to not forestall enough the development of Covid-19.

That, in turn, would essentially mean that the only way to ever get rid of SARS-CoV-2 would be near-universal immunization — a herculean task.

Focusing on how to block the coronavirus’s transmission is a much more efficient approach.

This is why randomized controlled trials of the vaccines currently under consideration should include regular monitoring for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in study subjects. The goal should be to evaluate whether the subjects acquire the infection at all, and for how long, as well as how abundantly they shed and spread the virus, when and how.

Studying these issues could also help cast a light on the role of so-called superspreading events in this pandemic.

More and more research suggests that a very small number of instances — gatherings at restaurants or bars, choir rehearsal, funerals, church services — might account for a vast majority of the cases of infection overall.

But the discussion about those instances has tended to focus on their settings and circumstances, such as the presence of crowds in confined spaces for extended periods of time.

Yet the question of whether some infected individuals, perhaps especially at certain stages of infection, are particularly infectious — whether they, themselves, are superspreaders — also needs to be studied head-on: When does contagiousness peak in whom and why? And can vaccines modify any of that?

The best vaccines don’t just protect the inoculated from getting sick from a disease. They also protect everyone else from even contracting the pathogen that causes that disease.

Preventing the very transmission of SARS-CoV-2, no less than stopping it from turning into Covid-19, should be a main priority of current efforts to develop the vaccines to end this pandemic.

One remarkable aspect of the Covid-19 pandemic has been how often unpopular scientific ideas, from the lab-leak theory to the efficacy of masks, were initially dismissed, even ridiculed, only to resurface later in mainstream thinking. Differences of opinion have sometimes been rooted in disagreement over the underlying science. But the more common motivation has been political.

Another reversal in thinking may be imminent. Some scientists have raised concerns that the safety risks of Covid-19 vaccines have been underestimated. But the politics of vaccination has relegated their concerns to the outskirts of scientific thinking—for now.

Historically, the safety of medications—including vaccines—is often not fully understood until they are deployed in large populations. Examples include rofecoxib (Vioxx), a pain reliever that increased the risk of heart attack and stroke; antidepressants that appeared to increase suicide attempts among young adults; and an influenza vaccine used in the 2009-10 swine flu epidemic that was suspected of causing febrile convulsions and narcolepsy in children. Evidence from the real world is valuable, as clinical trials often enroll patients who aren’t representative of the general population. We learn more about drug safety from real-world evidence and can adjust clinical recommendations to balance risk and benefits.

The Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, or Vaers, which is administered by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration, is a database that allows Americans to document adverse events that happen after receiving a vaccine. The FDA and CDC state that the database isn’t designed to determine whether the events were caused by a vaccine. This is true. But the data can nonetheless be evaluated, accounting for its strengths and weaknesses, and that is what the CDC and FDA say they do.

The Vaers data for Covid-19 vaccines show an interesting pattern. Among the 310 million Covid-19 vaccines given, several adverse events are reported at high rates in the days immediately after vaccination, and then fall precipitously afterward. Some of these adverse events might have occurred anyway. The pattern may be partly attributable to the tendency to report more events that happen soon after vaccination.

The database can’t say what would have happened in the absence of vaccination. Nonetheless, the large clustering of certain adverse events immediately after vaccination is concerning, and the silence around these potential signals of harm reflects the politics surrounding Covid-19 vaccines. Stigmatizing such concerns is bad for scientific integrity and could harm patients.

Four serious adverse events follow this arc, according to data taken directly from Vaers: low platelets (thrombocytopenia); noninfectious myocarditis, or heart inflammation, especially for those under 30; deep-vein thrombosis; and death. Vaers records 321 cases of myocarditis within five days of receiving a vaccination, falling to almost zero by 10 days. Prior research has shown that only a fraction of adverse events are reported, so the true number of cases is almost certainly higher. This tendency of underreporting is consistent with our clinical experience.

Analyses to confirm or dismiss these findings should be performed using large data sets of health-insurance companies and healthcare organizations. The CDC and FDA are surely aware of these data patterns, yet neither agency has acknowledged the trend.

The implication is that the risks of a Covid-19 vaccine may outweigh the benefits for certain low-risk populations, such as children, young adults and people who have recovered from Covid-19. This is especially true in regions with low levels of community spread, since the likelihood of illness depends on exposure risk.

And while you would never know it from listening to public-health officials, not a single published study has demonstrated that patients with a prior infection benefit from Covid-19 vaccination. That this isn’t readily acknowledged by the CDC or Anthony Fauci is an indication of how deeply entangled pandemic politics is in science.

There are, however, signs of life for scientific honesty. In May, the Norwegian Medicines Agency reviewed case files for the first 100 reported deaths of nursing-home residents who received the Pfizer vaccine. The agency concluded that the vaccine “likely” contributed to the deaths of 10 of these residents through side effects such as fever and diarrhea, and “possibly” contributed to the deaths of an additional 26. But this type of honesty is rare. And it is rare for any vaccine to be linked to deaths, so this unusual development for mRNA vaccines merits further investigation.

The battle to recover scientific honesty will be an uphill one in the U.S. Anti-Trump politics in the spring of 2020 mushroomed into social-media censorship. News reporting often lacked intellectual curiosity about the appropriateness of public-health guidelines—or why a vocal minority of scientists strongly disagreed with prevailing opinions. Scientists have advocated for or against Covid-19 therapies while having financial relationships with product manufacturers and their foundation benefactors.

Public-health authorities are making a mistake and risking the public’s trust by not being forthcoming about the possibility of harm from certain vaccine side effects. There will be lasting consequences from mingling political partisanship and science during the management of a public-health crisis.

None of the current trials are designed to detect a reduction in any serious outcome such as hospitalisations, intensive care use, or deaths

Vaccines are being hailed as the solution to the covid-19 pandemic, but the vaccine trials currently underway are not designed to tell us if they will save lives, reports Peter Doshi, Associate Editor at The BMJ today.

Several covid-19 vaccine trials are now in their most advanced (phase 3) stage, but what will it mean exactly when a vaccine is declared “effective”? 

Many may assume that successful phase 3 studies will mean we have a proven way of keeping people from getting very sick and dying from covid-19. And a robust way to interrupt viral transmission.

Yet the current phase 3 trials are not actually set up to prove either, says Doshi. 

“None of the trials currently underway are designed to detect a reduction in any serious outcome such as hospitalisations, intensive care use, or deaths. Nor are the vaccines being studied to determine whether they can interrupt transmission of the virus,” he writes.

He explains that all ongoing phase 3 trials for which details have been released are evaluating mild, not severe, disease - and they will be able to report final results once around 150 participants develop symptoms.

In Pfizer and Moderna’s trials, for example, individuals with only a cough and positive lab test would bring those trials one event closer to their completion.

Yet Doshi argues that vaccine manufacturers have done little to dispel the notion that severe covid-19 was what was being assessed. 

Moderna, for example, called hospitalisations a “key secondary endpoint” in statements to the media. But Tal Zaks, Chief Medical Officer at Moderna, told The BMJ that their trial lacks adequate statistical power to assess that endpoint.

Part of the reason may be numbers, says Doshi. Because most people with symptomatic covid-19 infections experience only mild symptoms, even trials involving 30,000 or more patients would turn up relatively few cases of severe disease. 

“Hospitalisations and deaths from covid-19 are simply too uncommon in the population being studied for an effective vaccine to demonstrate statistically significant differences in a trial of 30,000 people,” he adds. “The same is true regarding whether it can save lives or prevent transmission: the trials are not designed to find out.” 

Zaks confirms that Moderna’s trial will not demonstrate prevention of hospitalisation because the size and duration of the trial would need to be vastly increased to collect the necessary data. “Neither of these I think are acceptable in the current public need for knowing expeditiously that a vaccine works,” he told The BMJ.

Moderna’s trial is designed to find out if the vaccine can prevent covid-19 disease, says Zaks. Like Pfizer and Johnson and Johnson, Moderna has designed its study to detect a relative risk reduction of at least 30% in participants developing lab-confirmed covid-19, consistent with FDA and international guidance.

Zaks also points to influenza vaccines, saying they protect against severe disease better than mild disease. “To Moderna, it’s the same for covid-19: if their vaccine is shown to reduce symptomatic covid-19, they will feel confident it also protects against serious outcomes,” Doshi writes.

But Doshi raises another important issue - that few or perhaps none of the current vaccine trials appear to be designed to find out whether there is a benefit in the elderly, despite their obvious vulnerability to covid-19.

If the frail elderly are not enrolled into vaccine trials in sufficient numbers to determine whether there is a reduction in cases in this population, “there can be little basis for assuming any benefit against hospitalisation or mortality,” he warns.

Doshi says that we still have time to advocate for changes to ensure the ongoing trials address the questions that most need answering.

For example, why children, immunocompromised people, and pregnant women have largely been excluded; whether the right primary endpoint has been chosen; whether safety is being adequately evaluated; and whether gaps in our understanding of how our immune system responds to covid-19 are being addressed.

“The covid-19 vaccine trials may not have been designed with our input, but it is not too late to have our say and adjust their course. With stakes this high, we need all eyes on deck,” he argues.

I’m not an expert, but I have to dispute the claim that Covid-19 is a “vaccine-preventable” illness made in a June 14 letter.

Some of my family members were fully vaccinated and boosted and still contracted Covid not once, but twice. I support vaccinations, but they do not prevent infection, though they can mitigate the negative effects of Covid.

Even after vaccination, people can contract Covid, often asymptomatically or with mild symptoms, and transmit it to others.

Why don’t Covid-19 vaccinations last longer?

Measles shots are good for life, chickenpox immunizations protect for 10 to 20 years, and tetanus jabs last a decade or more. But U.S. officials are weighing whether to authorize Covid-19 boosters for vaccinated adults as soon as six months after the initial inoculation.

The goal of a vaccine is to provide the protection afforded by natural infection, but without the risk of serious illness or death.

“A really good vaccine makes it so someone does not get infected even if they are exposed to the virus,” said Rustom Antia, a biology professor at Emory University who studies immune responses. “But not all vaccines are ideal.”

The three tiers of defense, he said, include full protection against infection and transmission; protection against serious illness and transmission; or protection against serious illness only.

The effectiveness depends on the magnitude of the immune response a vaccine induces, how fast the resulting antibodies decay, whether the virus or bacteria tend to mutate, and the location of the infection.

The threshold of protection is the level of immunity that’s sufficient to keep from getting sick. For every bug, it’s different, and even how it’s determined varies.

“Basically, it’s levels of antibodies or neutralizing antibodies per milliliter of blood,” said Mark Slifka, a professor at Oregon Health & Science University.

(T-cells also contribute to protection, but antibodies are easier to measure.)

A threshold 0.01 international units per milliliter was confirmed for tetanus in 1942 when a pair of German researchers intentionally exposed themselves to the toxin to test the findings of previous animal studies.

“One of them gave himself two lethal doses of tetanus in his thigh, and monitored how well it went,” Dr. Slifka said. “His co-author did three lethal doses.”

Neither got sick.

A threshold for measles was pinned down in 1985 after a college dorm was exposed to the disease shortly after a blood drive. Researchers checked antibody concentrations in the students’ blood donations and identified 0.02 international units per milliliter as the level needed to prevent infection.

With these diseases, the magnitudes of response to the vaccines combined with the antibodies’ rates of decay produce durable immune responses: Measles antibodies decay slowly. Tetanus antibodies decay more quickly, but the vaccine causes the body to produce far more than it needs, offsetting the decline.

“We’re fortunate with tetanus, diphtheria, measles and vaccinia,” Dr. Slifka said. “We have identified what the threshold of protection is. You track antibody decline over time, and if you know the threshold of protection, you can calculate durability of protection. With Covid, we don’t know.”

Historically, the most effective vaccines have used replicating viruses, which essentially elicit lifelong immunity.

Measles and chickenpox vaccines use replicating viruses.

Non-replicating vaccines and protein-based vaccines (such as the one for tetanus) don’t last as long, but their effectiveness can be enhanced with the addition of an adjuvant—a substance that enhances the magnitude of the response.

Tetanus and hepatitis A vaccines use an adjuvant.

The Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccines use non-replicating adenovirus and don’t contain an adjuvant. The Pfizer and Moderna messenger RNA Covid-19 vaccines, which work differently, don’t contain any virus at all. 

Complicating things further, viruses and bacteria that mutate to escape the body’s immune response are harder to control.

Measles, mumps, rubella and chickenpox hardly mutate at all, but at least eight variants of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, have been found, according to the British Medical Journal.  

“It does make it more complicated for the vaccine to work,” Dr. Slifka said. “You’re chasing multiple targets over time. Flu also mutates. With flu, we’ve adjusted by making a new flu vaccine each year that as closely as possible matches the new strain of flu.”

Flu vaccines can offer protection for at least six months.

Setting aside the complexities of crafting an effective vaccine to combat a shape-shifting virus, some hope has revolved around the possibility of defeating Covid-19 by achieving herd immunity, but, according to Dr. Antia, the way coronaviruses infect the body makes that challenging.

“Vaccines are very unlikely to lead to long-lasting herd immunity for many respiratory infections,” Dr. Antia said. “The herd immunity only lasts for a modest period of time. It depends on how fast the virus changes. It depends on how fast the immunity wanes.”

Part of the problem is that coronaviruses replicate in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts.

“We have good circulation in our lungs and body, but not on the surfaces of our nostrils,” Dr. Slifka said. “We can block severe disease because there are antibodies in the lower respiratory tract.”

But the risk of low-level infections in the upper respiratory tract can persist.

Moving forward, Covid-19 vaccines will be updated to combat variants of the virus, and according to researchers at Imperial College London, the next generation of vaccines might also focus on enhancing immunity in the moist surfaces of the nose and lungs.

In the meantime, avoiding the slippery virus might require another shot.

As Covid-19 vaccine development picks up pace, the Philippines has drawn up an immunization plan. The bottom line, officials say: Getting doses to enough of the population to rein in the virus will take two to five years.

That is the forecast for reaching the target of 60 million to 70 million of the country’s nearly 110 million people, they say, using a patchwork of vaccines from different suppliers. So far the Philippines has struck just one vaccine deal, for 2.6 million shots—enough for 1.3 million people.

Manila’s early blueprint is a reality check for those expecting a swift vaccine-driven end to the pandemic and revival of global trade and travel. While some countries may be able to get shots to large portions of their populations in 2021, some in the developing world may be years away from protecting more than their highest-risk populations.

That means the virus will continue to circulate and claim lives in various corners of the map. Some global health specialists worry about a future in which the coronavirus lurks in such places, becoming endemic—and perhaps evolving in ways that make current vaccines less effective.

“There’s no point having products that do not reach the majority of the world’s population,” said Soumya Swaminathan, chief scientist of the World Health Organization. She cited the hepatitis B vaccine, saying it took 30 years after its introduction in rich countries to reach low- and middle-income countries.

Only one disease—smallpox—has ever been eradicated from the human population using a vaccine.

For countries like the Philippines, the challenge of procuring the vaccine from the limited supply and financing the purchase is just the start: They must then mount large, coordinated operations to get the shots to their far-flung populations. “Our battle with Covid-19 is going to be a long one,” Carlito Galvez Jr., who leads the country’s vaccine effort, said in late November.

In the U.S., the supply chief for the government-backed Operation Warp Speed vaccine initiative said shots could be available to all by June. In the Philippines, officials say it will take up to two years just to cover the approximately 35% of the population identified as high-risk or high-priority: groups like front-line health-care workers, government staff, senior citizens and people with existing medical conditions. Officials estimate they will be able to inoculate 25 to 35 million people a year.

The Philippines, which is suffering one of the worst outbreaks in Southeast Asia, lags behind in signing advance purchase agreements. Months of talks with 17 companies from seven countries have yielded just one agreement, the 2.6 million-dose deal with AstraZeneca.

The United Nations-backed Covax initiative aims to secure enough vaccines for countries’ highest-risk 20%. Going beyond that benchmark will be especially hard for places like the Philippines. It lacks vaccine-production capacity and has no domestic vaccine candidate in development, and without locking in deals, it may have to wait for deliveries in relatively small batches from multiple suppliers.

Governments have reserved about 9.8 billion doses in deals with drugmakers, with 3.9 billion bound for high-income countries, according to an analysis of procurement data by the Duke Global Health Innovation Center. It cited models showing insufficient supplies to meet global demand until 2023 or 2024.

Philippines vaccine chief Mr. Galvez said last week that more orders are on the horizon. Lawmakers passed a bill waiving a requirement for years of advance-stage trials, and President Rodrigo Duterte this month empowered the country’s Food and Drug Administration to issue emergency-use authorizations that will slash approval time.

Mr. Galvez said he expects the Philippines to secure about 10 million to 20 million doses from each of some half-dozen drugmakers from the U.S., U.K., China, India and Russia, on course for a total of 50 million to 60 million doses by the end of 2021.

Once the shots are in hand, the public health-care system must overcome obstacles that have stymied past vaccination programs. One high hurdle is transportation: The Philippines is an archipelago, with many people living in remote villages.

In the past supplies have often expired before they could be administered, said Dr. Charles Yu, vice chancellor for research at the De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute in Manila. Some Covid-19 vaccines need to be kept at extremely low temperatures that will require custom-built cold-chain storage and transport facilities.

For decades, the Philippines has fared worse on immunization than many of its neighbors. World Health Organization data shows it falling far short of the targets for some of the most ubiquitous vaccines. As of 2019, only 11% of the country’s administrative districts had reached the 80% coverage recommended to achieve herd immunity for diphtheria, and just 2% had reached the 95% coverage recommended for measles.

According to the Philippines’ Department of Health, 66% of infants had received all basic recommended vaccines in 2018, down from about 86% in 2010. Experts attribute this in part to wavering public confidence following a vaccine-program debacle in 2017. The government stopped administering Sanofi Pasteur’s dengue-fever vaccine, Dengvaxia, to schoolchildren after the company said it could put some recipients at higher risk.

“After Dengvaxia, measles went up, and polio, which was virtually eradicated, returned with a vengeance,” said Dr. Yu of the De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute. “Confidence is not very high, but fear of the vaccine may be overcome by fear of this virus and what it’s done to people’s lives.”

Nearly half of Americans believe Covid vaccines have probably caused a significant number of unexplained deaths, according to a Rasmussen Reports survey last week. In December, Rasmussen reported that a near equal proportion worry that Covid vaccines may have major side effects (57%) as believe they are effective (56%).

People can hold both views at the same time. But the self-professed expert class and many who call themselves journalists dismiss anyone who questions their Covid vaccine orthodoxy as an “anti-vaxxer”—a label as sneering as “climate denier.”

But surveys show that most Americans, including those who didn’t get Covid shots, don’t distrust vaccines in general. Public views on Covid vaccines are more complicated because they are new and haven’t been thoroughly studied. The experts are responsible for vaccine skepticism because they aren’t honest about the potential risks.

The mRNA vaccines use a novel technology to combat a novel virus that is evolving. They were authorized by the Food and Drug Administration on an emergency basis after only 10 months of testing. Vaccine trials usually take about 10 years.

With thousands dying each day, the FDA in December 2020 decided it couldn’t wait for an exhaustive study and authorized the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines after two large randomized controlled trials showed they were nearly 95% effective against symptomatic infection. But patients had been tracked for only a few months. The trials included too few participants to identify relatively rare adverse effects, especially among those of different age groups or with particular medical conditions. Public-health officials couldn’t conclude with any certainty whether the vaccines cause, for example, neurological symptoms in 1 of every 100,000 recipients or cardiac problems in 1 of every 10,000 young men.

While the FDA later granted both vaccines full approval, boosters were never tested in large clinical trials. Nor has the government’s recommended vaccine regimen, which for seniors has been five doses in less than two years. Booster recommendations were made on the fly on the assumption that the benefits outweighed the vaccine risks. Last fall two senior FDA vaccine officials resigned, reportedly because political appointees were pre-empting agency scientists and rushing boosters for all adults without enough evidence that they were necessary or safe.

“Since the boosters have potential side effects, however rare, it’s important to direct them to the people who will gain a clear benefit,” they wrote in the Washington Post in November 2021. “A healthy young person with two mRNA vaccine doses is extremely unlikely to be hospitalized with covid, so the case for risking any side effects—such as myocarditis—diminishes substantially.”

They also raised the concern that boosters could lead to immunological imprinting, in which “repeatedly ‘training’ the immune system to fight the original virus could reduce the effectiveness of a variant-specific booster.”

Scientists continue to study and make new discoveries about the virus; the same goes for vaccines. An article in the American Heart Association’s journal Circulation last week found a link between myocarditis in teens and higher circulating levels of vaccine spike proteins in the blood. The authors found no correlation with vaccine antibody or T-cell responses, suspected by many as the cause of myocarditis.

A Dec. 22 study in Science Immunology found that repeated mRNA vaccines increased production of a specific class of antibodies known as IgG4, which is associated with immune tolerance. That’s when the immune system continually encounters a foreign agent, learns it isn’t lethal, and stops targeting it. In the case of the vaccine spike protein, IgG4 could make people more susceptible to future Covid infection.

All this deserves more study. To say the human organism and its systems are complicated is an understatement. A little more humility by those who purport to be experts is in order. It’s usually impossible to prove a death or adverse event is caused by a vaccine. But when a friend dies unexpectedly soon after getting inoculated, it isn’t irrational to wonder if a vaccine has contributed.

Stanford health-policy professor Michelle Mello—a vocal critic of vaccine misinformation—described her personal angst in the San Francisco Chronicle when her healthy 45-year-old husband suffered a stroke a few days after his second Covid dose. “Even after what one doctor called ‘a million-dollar workup,’ no one can figure out what happened,” she wrote in July 2021.

When she suggested reporting the stroke to the federal Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, a self-reporting database that tracks events possibly related to vaccines, “the hospital care team shifted uncomfortably,” apparently worried that “anti-vaccination groups are combing those reports looking for tidbits to support their claims that the vaccines are unsafe.”

The internet is full of stories of unexplained deaths that follow vaccines, many of which may be coincidence but some of which may not. The more the experts deny or ignore what people see with their own eyes, or what new evidence and experience show, the more people will ignore their counsel and be open to charlatans who undermine all vaccination.

U.S. health regulators delayed their review of Pfizer Inc.’s Covid-19 vaccine in children under 5 years old because the initial two-dose series so far wasn’t working well against the Omicron variant during testing, people familiar with the decision said.

An early look at data showed the vaccine to be effective against the Delta variant during testing while that was the dominant strain, but some vaccinated children developed Covid-19 after Omicron emerged, the people said.

So few study subjects, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, developed Covid-19 during testing thus far that the small number of Omicron cases made the vaccine appear less effective in an early statistical analysis, the people said.

As more cases emerge, Pfizer’s shot might wind up providing stronger protection against Omicron, the people said, if the bulk of infections are in unvaccinated subjects.

Officials from the Food and Drug Administration and Pfizer agreed it would be better to wait for the additional cases, the people said. The extra time would let the agency assess the vaccine’s effectiveness as either two doses or three, they said. The FDA was going to make its decision by looking at whether the shot generated immune responses comparable with those seen in older people.

The delay will also allow regulators to see how a third dose performs, the people said. That additional dose is given at least two months after the second shot. The FDA hopes to have a decision on the vaccine this spring, the people said; Pfizer has said it expects study results in early April.

Yet researchers are counting on more cases just as the Omicron wave declines in many countries. That could make it difficult to get enough Covid-19 cases to determine efficacy quickly, potentially forcing researchers to rely on immune responses.

The decision to wait, which came days before the FDA was expected to issue its determination, angered some parents who were eager to vaccinate their young children and confused others unsure of what to do. It also prompted some health experts to criticize the FDA, saying it should have waited all along to avoid authorizing a medicine that didn’t generate a strong enough immune response.

The FDA had urged Pfizer to apply for authorization in children ages 6 months to 5 years old, though the company had been planning to wait for testing to finish.

The vaccine, from Pfizer and partner BioNTech SE, is in wide use among people 5 years and older. Younger children are the only group waiting for FDA clearance, and Pfizer has been testing a lower dose of its vaccine in that cohort.

The testing was taking two forms: For a faster assessment, the companies explored whether the shot produced the same level of immune response in the younger children as it did in older people. They were also looking to see how many young study subjects developed Covid-19, then analyzing the numbers of vaccinated and unvaccinated people who develop cases to determine the shot’s efficacy.

In a preliminary look at the data, researchers saw the vaccine was about 50% effective in the children when Delta was the predominant strain circulating, despite mixed results in whether the vaccine generated the desired immune response, the people said.

In children ages 6 months to 2 years, the shot generated an immune response comparable to that seen in young adults, but it didn’t do so in children ages 2 to 4 years, according to the companies. Independent vaccine experts say they don’t know why the vaccine performed poorly in some children, and the companies have declined to speculate.

One factor, the experts say, could be that children have less developed immune systems. The relatively small number of Covid-19 cases that have emerged in study subjects could also potentially skew results.

Some health experts point to the low dosage given to the young children as another possible factor. Pfizer and BioNTech are testing a 3-microgram dose in children under 5 years, one-tenth the dose given to older children and adults. Using a higher dose risked more adverse effects such as sore arms and fever, one of the people familiar with the vaccine’s development said.

Pfizer had studied a higher dose of 10 micrograms in a small group of children in an early study last year, but the drugmaker said it found too many of the subjects experienced side effects such as fevers and chills.

Testing has found the 3-microgram doses have a good safety profile, Pfizer has said. The companies have said they hadn’t observed any serious safety concerns during the testing.

The continuing study is evaluating a third dose at the same 3-microgram dose. The extra shot has produced a strong immune response in testing, one of the people said.

How safe are the Covid-19 vaccines? Under my leadership, the Florida Department of Health analyzed overall mortality and cardiac-related mortality risk associated with Covid-19 vaccination. We found an 84% increase in the relative incidence of cardiac-related death among men 18 to 39 within 28 days following mRNA vaccination.

The left has smeared these results as “anti-science,” as Holden Thorpe, the editor of Science, recently stated in an editorial. But time and again, the unorthodox science related to Covid-19 becomes the mainstream. Scientists have been attacked for questioning the efficacy of lockdowns, for urging schools to reopen, for challenging the effectiveness of mask mandates, and for opposing vaccine mandates and passports. The scientists asking these questions had the data on their side, but critics bowed to fear and political ideology.

It’s happening again. The increased risk of cardiovascular events following the Covid-19 vaccine isn’t news; it has been known for over a year. Research has identified cardiovascular risks in the general population, and especially among young males following Covid-19 mRNA vaccination:

• A Scandinavian study in JAMA Open noted an increased risk of coronary artery disease after Moderna’s mRNA vaccine, along with an increased risk of cerebrovascular disease after both Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccines.

• Findings in the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research suggest that Covid-19 mRNA vaccination could be associated with an increased risk of acute myocardial infarction among Medicare enrollees.

• A study in JAMA Cardiology reported that Covid-19 mRNA vaccination increased the incidence of diagnosed myocarditis in males 16 to 24 by as much as a factor of 18 after the second dose.

• A study completed in Israel and published in Scientific Reports found that Covid-19 vaccine rollout was associated with an increase in acute cardiac events among young people.

Every study must remain within its parameters, and the sample size of young men who met conditions to be included in our study was 77. But our findings are consistent with the data above.

I wouldn’t have necessarily made my recommendation in earlier stages of the pandemic; the guidance in our study clearly states that it is based on the current high level of global immunity to Covid-19, which limits the benefit of vaccination.

Backed by the data, I stand by my recommendation against Covid-19 mRNA vaccination for young men. At this point in the pandemic, it is unlikely that the benefits outweigh these risks. The public can be assured that I will continue to lead with data, and I will place their interests ahead of political pressure and fear-based ideologies.

You might have heard a radio advertisement warning that if you’ve had Covid, you could get it again and experience even worse symptoms. The message, sponsored by the Health and Human Services Department, claims that updated bivalent vaccines will improve your protection.

This is deceptive advertising. But the public-health establishment’s praise for the bivalent shots shouldn’t come as a surprise. Federal agencies took the unprecedented step of ordering vaccine makers to produce them and recommending them without data supporting their safety or efficacy.

The idea of updating mRNA Covid shots every season originally held promise. One advantage of mRNA technology is that manufacturers can tweak the genetic sequence and rapidly produce new vaccines targeting new variants. Hence the bivalent boosters targeting the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron variants along with the original Wuhan strain.

But three scientific problems have arisen. First, the virus is evolving much faster than the vaccines can be updated. Second, vaccines have hard-wired our immune systems to respond to the original Wuhan strain, so we churn out fewer antibodies that neutralize variants targeted by updated vaccines. Third, antibodies rapidly wane after a few months.

Two studies in the New England Journal of Medicine this month showed that bivalent boosters increase neutralizing antibodies against the BA.4 and BA.5 variants, but not significantly more than the original boosters. In one study, antibody levels after the bivalent boosters were 11 times as high against the Wuhan variant as BA.5.

The authors posit that immune imprinting “may pose a greater challenge than is currently appreciated for inducing robust immunity against SARS-CoV-2 variants.” This isn’t unique to Covid or mRNA vaccines, though boosters may amplify the effect. Our first exposure as children to the flu—whether by infection or vaccination—affects our future response to different strains.

The original Covid vaccines and boosters trained our memory B-cells to produce antibodies against the Wuhan variant. As the University of Pennsylvania’s Paul Offit explains in a New England Journal of Medicine article, previously vaccinated people who received the bivalent booster were “primed” to respond to the Wuhan strain and mounted an inferior antibody response to other variants.

The studies’ findings contradict November press releases from Pfizer and Moderna asserting that their bivalents produced a response to the BA.4 and BA.5 variants four to six times that of the original boosters. These claims are misleading. Neither vaccine maker conducted a randomized trial. They tested the original boosters last winter, long before the BA.5 surge and 4½ to six months after trial participants had received their third shots. The bivalents, by contrast, were tested after BA.5 began to surge, 9½ to 11 months after recipients had received their third shots.

A longer interval between shots would increase the antibody boost to the BA.5 variant. So would a prior infection with the BA.5 variant. In other words, people who received the bivalent boosters in August would have been primed to produce more antibodies in response to BA.5.

The vaccine makers designed their studies to get the results they wanted. Public-health authorities didn’t raise an eyebrow, but why would they? They have a vested interest in promoting the bivalents.

The Food and Drug Administration ordered the vaccine makers in June to update the boosters against BA.4 and BA.5 and rushed in late August to authorize the bivalents before clinical data were available. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended the bivalents for all adults without any evidence that they were effective or needed.

Vaccine makers could have performed small randomized trials last summer and early fall that tested the bivalents against the original boosters and a placebo group. Results could have been available by the end of September. But the public-health authorities didn’t want to wait—and now we know why.

The CDC published a study in November that estimated the bivalents were only 22% to 43% effective against infection during the BA.5 wave—their peak efficacy. As antibodies waned and new variants took over later in the fall, their protection against infection probably dropped to zero.

Another CDC study, in December, reported that seniors who received bivalents were 84% less likely to be hospitalized than the unvaccinated, and 73% less likely than those who had received two or more doses of the original vaccine. But neither study controlled for important confounding factors—for one, that the small minority who got bivalents were probably also more likely than those who hadn’t to follow other Covid precautions or seek out treatments such as Paxlovid.

FDA Commissioner Robert Califf tweeted on Jan. 11 that “COVID-19 vaccines have been associated with a significant reduction in hospitalization and death” (my emphasis). He should know that correlation doesn’t prove causation. A study found the unvaccinated were significantly more likely to get into car accidents, but that doesn’t mean vaccines prevent crashes.

Many of the same experts who trashed observational studies supporting hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin now flog intrinsically flawed studies on bivalent boosters. After zealously promoting the bivalents, they may be seeking vindication. But science isn’t about vindication.

Covid vaccines mitigated severe illness while most Americans gained immunity through natural infection, which substantially boosts protection. There’s a growing consensus that we need better vaccines and treatments to protect those still at risk. But we also need honest public-health leaders.

Six active duty Marines are speaking out against the Biden administration’s coronavirus vaccine mandate in a video that was aired during an anti-vaccine-mandate rally in Los Angeles on Sunday.

The video marks one of the most public displays by active duty service members of opposition to the mandate, which was ordered by Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin last August.

In the video, the six pilots — including the first female Marine F-35C pilot — speak about the effect their opposition to the mandate has had on their lives. They all face discharge from the military, the loss of benefits, or have faced some punitive measures.

Marine Lt. Col. Scott Duncan, a former Top Gun instructor and F-35 pilot, begins the video saying he was competitively selected to command an F-35 squadron, but that was rescinded due to his opposition to the vaccine mandate.

“I was competitively selected to command an F-35 squadron. That achievement took 18 years and seven months and was recently taken away because my religious accommodation and appeal both came back denied,” he said.

Marine Capt. Joshua Hoppe, an MV-22 Osprey pilot with just over nine years of service, said that if the mandate is not rescinded, “I will likely be removed from service, charged with misconduct, and the educational benefits that I’ve transferred to my children will be removed.”

“This mandate infringes on our religious freedoms and is being unlawfully enforced. I have sworn an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic. I will not abandon that oath,” Hoppe said.

Marine Capt. Nick Morrison, active duty Marine F-35 pilot with just under six years of service, said he is facing discharge after his religious accommodation request was denied.

“Absent intervention from our judicial branch or our senior military leadership, I face involuntary separation from our beloved corps after my religious accommodation request was wrongfully denied. These injustices being carried against an officer are likely occurring at even greater scale to our junior Marines. When we took the voluntary oath of service, we did not surrender our constitutional right to exercise religious freedom,” he said.

Marine Capt. Catherine Stark, the Marine Corps’ first female F-35C Lightning II pilot, said in the video, “This past year, the policies in place have led to me being personally targeted and discriminated against. I pray to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ that the military can reverse the mandate and respect my religious and moral beliefs as well as my legitimate health concerns.”

Marine Lt. Col. Jonathan Reed, a Top Gun graduate and an F-18 pilot who has served for 18 years and 5 months, including five deployments, said he has been removed from senior positions within his units as he awaits a decision on his appeal of his religious accommodation denial.

“Resulting from our quest for religious accommodation from Covid vaccines, I’ve been removed from senior positions within my units and I am awaiting final adjudication of my religious accommodation appeal,” he said.

“Like thousands of other military service members, I face likely administrative separation from service. I stand here with you, and with thousands of other service members, at great risk in the aggressive defense of our Constitution and of our religious beliefs,” he said.

Marine Lt. Col. Hank Hortenstine, who primarily served as an instructor pilot for multiple helicopters and fixed wing aircraft with three combat deployments, said he has been grounded for not wanting to take the vaccine.

“Now I’ve been grounded and I’m being processed for punitive discharge because of my religious and conscientious objection to the shot mandate,” he said.

“These stories you’ve heard today are ours. However, it bears repeating that we stand today for tens of thousands of service members in similar circumstances or even worse. Over 1,000 have already been punitively discharged under similar grounds. We stand today for truth, religious liberty, and in fulfillment of the oath that we took to support and defend the Constitution.”

More than 1,500 Marines have been discharged, as well as approximately 100 soldiers, approximately 250 airmen, and approximately 800 sailors, over the vaccine mandate so far.

Thousands more are expected to be discharged, including many who applied for religious accommodation but were denied. So far, several dozen have been approved, but the circumstances around those approvals are unclear.

Rep. Darrell Issa (R-CA) received confirmation that at least several of those who have had requests approved were already in the process of leaving the military, as Breitbart News reported in February.

Pandemic worry is the “highest it has been since last winter, before COVID-19 vaccines were readily available to the general public,” according to a Gallup poll released on Thursday. 

Out of 1,569 U.S. adults polled between January 13-14, 50 percent are worried about contracting coronavirus, up 12 points from Gallup’s last reading in late November and early December. The trend coincides with a spike in omicron variant infections and is similar to last July, when survey respondents’ worry increased as the delta variant spread. 

“The hopefulness Americans felt last spring after the rollout of the COVID-19 vaccines was first dashed over the summer by the delta variant, then recovered briefly as cases subsided, and is now being crushed by omicron,” according to the survey, which has a margin of sampling error is ±3 percentage points at the 95 percent confidence level.

Along party lines, worry about catching coronavirus among Democrats, independents, and people who are vaccinated has “risen by double digits.” Worry among Republicans and unvaccinated adults has increased as well, though they reportedly “remain among the least worried about infection.”

More Americans also said they got vaccinated when worry spiked during the delta surge, according to the report. 

“Such an increase in vaccinations has not been seen in the latest data,” the survey found.

Fifty-eight percent of U.S. adults say the pandemic is worsening, along with 20 percent who say its improving and 22 percent who think it is staying the same.Last summer, as vaccinations against coronavirus rose, four out of 5 of those polled believed the pandemic was improving. However, the spread of the delta variant sent that figure crashing to 15 percent, Gallup found.

“By October, with infections from the delta variant waning, a slim 51 percent majority once again thought the situation was improving,” according to the report. “However, as news of the omicron strain’s emergence in Africa began to circulate in November, Americans became more concerned, and the percentage saying the situation was improving fell 20 percentage points. The latest reading is down an additional 11 points.”

The World Health Organization (W.H.O.) said Tuesday there is currently “no evidence” demonstrating a need for healthy children or adolescents to receive booster doses of Chinese coronavirus vaccines.

“There’s no evidence right now that healthy children or healthy adolescents need boosters. No evidence at all,” (W.H.O.) Chief Scientist Dr. Soumya Swaminathan said at a regular W.H.O. press briefing on January 18.

The governments of the U.S., Israel, Germany, and Hungary recently began offering “boosters” of Chinese coronavirus vaccines to children and adolescents. A “booster” is an additional dose of a vaccine that a person receives after he or she has already completed the full series of an inoculation.

“Israel has begun offering boosters to children as young as 12, and the U.S. States Food and Drug Administration earlier this month authorized the use of a third dose of the Pfizer and BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 12 to 15,” Reuters reported on January 19.

“Last week Germany became the latest country to recommend that all children between ages of 12 and 17 receive a COVID-19 booster shot. Hungary has also done so,” according to the news agency.

Scientists and health experts worldwide continue to stress that children are among the lowest risk group for contracting a severe illness or dying due to an infection of the Chinese coronavirus, which is formally labeled “COVID-19.” A type of coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2 causes the disease known as “COVID-19.”

Children in the U.S. between the ages of 0 and 11 account for less than 0.1 percent of total deaths caused by the Chinese coronavirus since the W.H.O. declared a pandemic of the disease in March 2020, according to the latest figures by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Children and adolescents between the ages of 12 and 17 also account for less than 0.1 percent of total deaths caused by the disease in the U.S. since March 2020. Children and adolescents between the ages of 0 and 17 constitute 22.3 percent of the U.S. population, which is estimated at 332.4 million.


W.H.O. Chief Scientist Dr. Soumya Swaminathan on January 18 said evidence gathered to date by the W.H.O.’s “Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-CO-VAC)” shows that such vaccines currently available worldwide are primarily helping to reduce the prevalence of severe illness and death in Chinese coronavirus patients, while their efficacy in preventing transmission of the disease is “waning” against emerging variants of the disease capable of high rates of “immune escape,” such as omicron.

“The TAG-CO-VAC was set up … to pull together the threads of data and evidence that are coming from all of the other different working groups that W.H.O. has set up … and bits of evidence from all over the world. Essentially to determine … whether the vaccines need any change or not,” she said.

“The current vaccines are protecting people against getting severely ill and getting hospitalized and dying,” Swaminathan stated.

A Portuguese reporter asked the W.H.O. at the January 18 media briefing, “Will boosters give global immunity, lasting immunity to the virus?”

“This question of the boosters is also something we’ve been looking at very closely,” Swaminathan replied.

“Different variants have had different levels of immune escape. And with omicron, we know that it has the highest levels of immune escape or immune evasion that we’ve seen across all of the variants so far,” the W.H.O. chief scientist said.

“Across all of the vaccines, [W.H.O. has seen] high levels of protection against severe disease. That’s the outcome we’re most interested in: protection against death,” Swaminathan affirmed.


“Against omicron, many of the vaccines have shown a reduction in efficacy against infection. And that’s why we see a lot of breakthrough infections,” she acknowledged.

“There is some waning which occurs over a period of time. And we’ve seen that there’s a slight drop in the protection. Again, mostly against infection, but also a little bit against the severe disease,” Swaminathan revealed.

Women who received vaccinations against the Chinese coronavirus demonstrated a “delay” in their menstrual cycles of nearly one day “compared to those who were unvaccinated,” according to the findings of a U.S. government-funded study published on Wednesday, Agence France-Presse (AFP) reported.

“COVID-19 [Chinese coronavirus] vaccine was associated with a less than 1-day change in cycle length for both vaccine-dose cycles compared with prevaccine cycles,” according to the study’s results, which were published by the online medical journal Obstetrics & Gynecology on January 5.

“[U]nvaccinated individuals saw no significant change compared with three baseline cycles,” the study’s authors noted.


Chief study author Dr. Alison Edelman of the Oregon Health & Science University led a team of U.S. government-funded researchers to conduct the analysis. The scientists examined the menstrual cycles of roughly 4,000 U.S. women aged 18 to 45 years old “with normal cycle lengths (24–38 days) for three consecutive cycles before the first vaccine dose followed by vaccine-dose cycles (cycles 4–6) or, if unvaccinated, six cycles over a similar time period.”

About 2,400 participants in the study were vaccinated against “COVID-19,” or the disease caused by a type of coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. “COVID-19” is also known as the Chinese coronavirus. Roughly 1,500 unvaccinated women also participated in the menstrual study for comparison. Of the vaccinated women, 55 percent received doses of a coronavirus vaccine manufactured by Pfizer, 35 percent received a version made by Moderna, and seven percent received a Johnson & Johnson vaccine.

Dr. Alison Edelman told the AFP on January 6 she believes the “immune system’s response” to the Chinese coronavirus vaccine may have caused the changes in women’s menstrual cycles observed in her study.


“We know that the immune system and the reproductive system are interlinked,” she said.

“A revved-up immune system might have an impact on the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis,” the doctor continued.

Edelman defined this “axis” as a “highway of how your brain talks to your ovaries, talks to your uterus,” or, put more simply, a woman’s “body clock.”

“Specifically, the production of inflammatory proteins called cytokines appears to disrupt the way this axis regulates the timing of menstrual cycles,” the study’s lead author observed.

“The changes seem most pronounced when vaccination takes place early in the follicular phase, which starts on the first day of the menstrual period (bleeding) and ends when ovulation begins,” Edelman noted.


The doctor revealed to AFP that “a subgroup” of participants in her study “who received two injections of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines during the same cycle, as opposed to two different cycles, saw an average increase in cycle length of two days.”

Pfizer‘s coronavirus vaccine consists of two doses administered 21 days apart. Moderna‘s coronavirus vaccine requires two doses administered 28 days apart. Johnson & Johnson‘s coronavirus vaccine consists of a single dose. Both Pfizer and Moderna use new mRNA technology as the basis for their “COVID-19” vaccines while Johnson & Johnson uses a more established “viral vector” vaccine technology.

“Viral vector vaccines use a modified version of a virus that is different from the virus being targeted to deliver important instructions to our cells [i.e how to fight the targeted virus upon future infection]. The modified version of the virus is called a vector virus,” according to the U.S Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).


“COVID-19” vaccines based on mRNA technology, which did not exist in an authorized form prior to March 2020, “use the genetic sequence or ‘code’ of the antigen [inactivated virus proteins] translated into mRNA,” according to the BBC.

“It’s a ghost of the real thing, fooling the body into creating very real antibodies,” the British broadcaster detailed in November 2021.

“The artificial mRNA itself then disappears, degraded by the body’s natural defences including enzymes that break it down, leaving us with only the antibodies,” the BBC explained.

South African President Cyril Ramaphosa tested positive for an undisclosed strain of the Chinese coronavirus Sunday and was presenting “mild symptoms” of illness as of Monday, Reuters reported.

“President @CyrilRamaphosa appreciates the well wishes he is receiving from various quarters following his COVID-19 [Chinese coronavirus] positive result,” the office of the South African presidency wrote in a Twitter statement posted December 13.

“The President remains in good spirits and continues to present with mild symptoms,” the statement read.

Ramaphosa’s ongoing infection “is causing him to delay a vaccine booster shot which he was scheduled to receive this week,” his office revealed in a separate Twitter statement posted December 13. The office did not specify the brand or type of vaccine he was to receive as a “booster” shot, which is an additional dose of a vaccine after completion of a full vaccine series.

The South African leader was fully vaccinated against the Chinese coronavirus when he tested positive for the disease on December 12.


“Ramaphosa, who was given Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine in February, tested positive the same day that he addressed a state memorial to the last leader of South Africa’s white minority government, FW de Klerk, in Cape Town,” according to Reuters.

Johnson & Johnson’s Chinese coronavirus vaccine is a single-dose shot. It works by injecting “a piece of a modified virus that is not the virus that causes COVID-19 [Chinese coronavirus]” into a recipient, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

“This modified virus is called the vector virus … [which] gives instructions to cells in the body to create an immune response,” the CDC explained in October.

“This response helps protect you from getting sick with COVID-19 [Chinese coronavirus] in the future,” the U.S. public health agency wrote.

Scientists in southern Africa discovered a new variant of “Covid-19” called Omicron in mid-November. Doctors first detected Omicron in Botswana and then in the neighboring country of South Africa in subsequent days, but the Netherlands and Belgium have since revealed that they had samples testing positive for Omicron dating to before the South African officials alerted the World Health Organization (W.H.O.) to their discovery.

“The first cases of the variant were collected in Botswana on 11 November, and the earliest in South Africa was recorded three days later,” the Guardian reported on November 24.


Omicron is the latest variant of “Covid-19,” which is the disease caused by a type of coronavirus named SARS-CoV-2. “Covid-19” is also known as the Chinese coronavirus.

Recent data out of southern Africa suggests Omicron may be more contagious than Delta, which was the latest dominant strain of “Covid-19” prior to Omicron’s discovery. The data suggests Omicron is “efficiently transmitting, and probably more efficiently transmitting even than the Delta variant,” Michael Ryan, the executive director of the W.H.O.’s Health Emergencies Programme, told reporters at a press briefing on December 8.

Delta was first detected in India in December 2020 and is currently the most prevalent strain of SARS CoV-2 worldwide. The variant “is believed to be more than twice as contagious as previous variants,” Yale Medicine noted on November 19. Delta has notoriously caused a significant number of “breakthrough” infections, or cases of “Covid-19” in people fully vaccinated against the disease.

A new study published on December 13 by Oxford University found that Omicron, like Delta, may also penetrate the immunity of people fully vaccinated against the Chinese coronavirus.


“Researchers from the University of Oxford tested blood samples of people 28 days after their second dose of either the Oxford-AstraZeneca or Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine,” CNBC reported.

“When omicron was introduced to those samples, scientists reported ‘a substantial fall’ in the neutralizing antibodies that fight off Covid compared to the immune responses seen against earlier variants,” the news site relayed.

Some vaccine recipients tested in the study “failed to neutralize [the virus] at all,” according to the Oxford University scientists.


“This will likely lead to increased breakthrough infections in previously infected or double vaccinated individuals, which could drive a further wave of infection, although there is currently no evidence of increased potential to cause severe disease, hospitalization or death,” the study’s authors wrote.

It remains unknown which variant of the Chinese coronavirus South African President Ramaphosa contracted on December 11.

Anyone 18 and older will be able to receive the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine this week at Hillsdale High School, according to a campus-wide email from Hillsdale College Director of Health Services Brock Lutz on Tuesday, March 30. However, it is important that students be informed of the risks associated with the COVID-19 vaccine before they take action.

While 55% of 340 Hillsdale students surveyed about the vaccine reported that they would not take it, as of a Feb. 18 Collegian article, raising concerns about the COVID-19 vaccine is taboo in mainstream society and the pressures to submit unquestioningly to the needle are great. 

The inconvenience of daily life without the COVID-19 vaccine is likely to increase dramatically in the near future. According to USA Today, New York will issue the nation’s first vaccination passport, the Excelsior Pass, on April 2. The pass will be used to allow vaccinated people entry to venues like Madison Square Garden, and according to the article, “it already lets people increase the size of a wedding party, or other catered event.” 

The perks of getting the vaccine are hard to resist. With the prospect of being banned from their favorite musician’s concert looming large, America’s youth are likely to agree to the small inconvenience of a vaccine in order to resume a somewhat-normal life. The issue, however, is that mRNA vaccines like the Moderna vaccine being offered to Hillsdale students have never before been approved for use in humans. Behind its innocuous name lie serious problems that must be presented to students before they walk into Hillsdale High on April 2. 

First, students should know that “COVID-19 vaccines have only been given conditional approval for emergency use. In the next two years, it will be reviewed whether their benefits really outweigh their risks,” according to Dr. Sucharit Bhakdi, former chair of the Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene at the Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz in west-central Germany. 

What’s more, the vaccine is unnecessary for college students — and even for older faculty and staff members. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the survival rate for COVID-19 among people aged 20 years and younger is 99.997%, while the rate for those aged 20-49 years is 99.98%. The rate for those aged 50-69 years is 99.5%. Why risk entering yourself in an ongoing experiment for those numbers?

According to former Pfizer Vice President and Chief Science Officer Dr. Mike Yeadon, “protection is needed only by those at notably elevated risk of death from the virus. In those people, there might even be an argument that the risks are worth bearing,” he said. “But those in good health and younger than 60 years, even perhaps a little older, don’t perish from the virus. In this large group, it’s wholly unethical to administer something novel and for which the potential for unwanted effects after a few months is completely uncharacterized.”

Additionally, there are serious health risks associated with the vaccine that the general public has not discussed, according to Yeadon and Bhakdi. For example, Bhakdi asserted that the vaccine increases the risk of blood clotting in those who take it. After the vaccine enters the bloodstream, it binds to cells that line blood vessels and induces them to produce the virus protein. Then, Bhakdi said, “many copies of the virus spike will appear on the cell surface. These may directly bind and activate blood platelets, which will trigger blood clotting.”

Blood clots have the potential to cause serious health problems and even death, Bhakdi warned.

“Triggering clot formation in your vessels is always potentially life-threatening. If clots form at vulnerable sites in the brain, spinal cord, and heart, interruption of blood flow may have irreversible and even fatal effects,” he said.

Another concern stems from the fact that the COVID-19 vaccine causes our cells to produce the virus protein themselves, which is a feature of mRNA vaccines, rather than directly introducing the virus protein into the body like a traditional vaccine would.

“Cells producing the spike protein may be attacked by our own immune system, because the immune system is trained to recognize and destroy cells that produce the virus,” Bhakdi said. “Damage to the blood vessel lining must be expected to cause the blood to clot as well. The fact is likely magnified in individuals receiving their second vaccinations, as well as in patients who have been infected with any coronavirus shortly before or after vaccination.”

Bhakdi suspects that the blood-clotting risks could be responsible for unnecessary deaths, and pose a threat to people of all ages.

Newsweek confirmed in a March 8 article that 970 people had died after receiving the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines. The data was drawn from VAERS, which is a “U.S.-based early warning system for vaccine side-effects,” according to the article.

At the end of the day, whether or not to walk into Hillsdale High and receive the experimental COVID-19 vaccine this Friday is a personal decision that each student must make for himself. However, it’s essential to look at the risks as well as the potential conveniences that may accompany an injection.

MANILA, Philippines — Senators strongly warned yesterday the government against risking the lives of Filipinos and procuring China’s Sinovac vaccine, saying it is not only expensive compared to other brands but also only reportedly 50 percent effective.

Senate Majority Leader Juan Miguel Zubiri and Senate Minority Leader Franklin Drilon in separate statements expressed alarm over reports that Sinovac trials in Brazil showed that the Chinese-made vaccine was only over 50 percent effective. Its maker, Sinovac Biotech Ltd., reportedly has so far withheld data on its trials.

They noted that Pfizer vaccine has a high efficacy rate of 95 percent but has strict cold storage requirements, while the AstraZeneca serum has at least 75 percent effectiveness but with more compliable storing standards.

Zubiri said the country’s search for COVID-19 vaccines must take into account key factors including safety, efficacy, pricing and ease of distribution and implementation.

“All these factors must be harmonized to make sure we deliver to our people the vaccine that is cost effective but is efficient and deliverable. When we say efficient that means a high efficacy rate,” Zubiri said.

“That’s why the plan to get vaccines with only a 50 percent efficacy rate is totally unacceptable and a total waste of our funds and resources. That there’s a 50/50 chance of you getting COVID even after being vaccinated is a joke!” he added.

To stress his point, Zubiri said a 50 percent efficacy could mean one out of two Filipinos jabbed with Sinovac would still be infected with COVID-19 that would be dangerous for senior citizens, frontliners and those with co-morbidities.

He appealed to the National Task Force on COVID-19 to look at the effectiveness of the candidate vaccines “rather than political or geo-political reasons.”

“Safety of our people should come first, not the feelings of our neighboring friends,” Zubiri said.

Drilon said while there is great urgency in procuring vaccines and the government is trying to strike a balance among various key factors, safety and efficacy should be the first and foremost consideration, otherwise, it runs the risk of people refusing the inoculations out of fear.

“We’re talking about the lives and the future of Filipinos here. We cannot accept ‘that will do’ when it comes to vaccines,” Drilon said in Filipino.

He said vaccine czar Secretary Carlito Galvez must consider the reports on the Chinese vaccine carefully and wait for clearer guidelines from the scientific community and other authorizing agencies to determine whether or not Sinovac “is worth offering to our people.”

It is most important, he said, that the government gets a vaccination program started in 2021 with the best possible combination of vaccines it can procure.

“There is a global shortage of vaccines and we should focus on vaccinating our priority segments,” Drilon said.

Herd immunity will require a multi-year vaccination program and, over time, the country can look to inoculating 60 percent to 90 percent of the population.

“But our near-term priority should be to vaccinate our frontliners and highest risk population, which is the first 20 percent,” Drilon said.

Meanwhile, flag carrier Philippine Airlines (PAL) is preparing its fleet to help in the eventual transport of COVID-19 vaccines to the country and around the region.

“The long-awaited global launch of the COVID-19 vaccine contributes to the cautious optimism of the Philippines’ travel and tourism sectors. PAL is readying its fleet of wide-body aircraft for the task of transporting vaccines to the Philippines and around the region,” it said.

Quezon City second district Rep. Precious Castelo earlier urged the government to tap local airlines for the transport and delivery of COVID-19 vaccines in and around the country. – Richmond Mercurio

The Pfizer-BioNTech covid-19 vaccine is “likely” to have been responsible for at least 10 deaths of frail elderly people in nursing homes in Norway, an expert review commissioned by the Norwegian Medicines Agency has concluded.

The expert group was established at the end of February 2021 to look into the cause of the first 100 reported deaths of nursing home residents who had received the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. At the time, around 30 000 elderly nursing home residents had been vaccinated.

Although the mortality rate in nursing homes is generally very high and the deaths of some nursing home residents after vaccination was anticipated, the Norwegian Medicines Agency wanted to determine whether the vaccine had possibly hastened any deaths and to gain a clearer understanding of the risks and benefits of its use in frail elderly people.

The review reported on 19 May and concluded that a causal link between the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine and death was considered “likely” in 10 of the 100 cases, “possible” in 26 cases, and “unlikely” in 59 cases. The remaining five were deemed “unclassifiable.”1

While emphasising considerable uncertainty around its conclusions, the expert group acknowledged a risk that adverse reactions to the vaccines among very frail patients could initiate a cascade of complications, which in the worst case scenario could lead to earlier death.

Extremely frail patients
“Frail patients can benefit from vaccination because they are at great risk of serious illness and even death if they become infected with the covid-19 virus,” said Sigurd Hortemo, senior medical consultant at the Norwegian Medicines Agency. “Nevertheless, the expert group believes that, for some of these frail patients, common adverse reactions may have contributed to a more serious course of their disease.”

The group noted that more thorough assessment of the benefits and risks of vaccination could have been made for some very frail elderly people, particularly during the first few weeks of the vaccine’s use.  People with a very short life expectancy have little to gain from being vaccinated, it said, noting a genuine risk that the time of death will be brought forward and that they will experience adverse reactions to the vaccine in the last days of their life.

The benefits of vaccination for very frail people with very short life expectancy should therefore be carefully assessed against the associated risks, and it may often be better not to vaccinate, the group recommended. However, the guidelines on risk assessment—issued by the Norwegian Institute of Public Health shortly after the first reported deaths of frail elderly patients after vaccination—were adequate, it said. These advise that doctors should assess such patients individually to determine whether the benefits of vaccination outweigh the side effects. The guidelines recommend that, ahead of vaccination, doctors should consider the benefits and disadvantages of giving the vaccine to extremely frail patients (such as those whose frailty is ranked 8 or 9 on the Clinical Frailty Scale or equivalent) or terminally ill patients.

Preventive measures such as good hydration, medicine reviews, and optimised treatment of comorbid conditions may also reduce the risk of fatal consequences from adverse reactions to vaccines, the expert group added.

Health authorities
As of 18 May 2021, 155 deaths had been reported in Norway after vaccination with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, and most deaths involved elderly and very frail nursing home residents.2

Pfizer has said in a statement that all decisions on the rollout of vaccine programmes reside with health authorities and that the Norwegian health authorities had previously issued updated recommendations on vaccinating terminally ill and extremely frail patients.

“More than 300 million doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech covid-19 vaccine have been administered globally,” said Pfizer. “Serious adverse events unrelated to, but close in timing to vaccination, are expected to occur at a similar rate in vaccinated individuals as they would in the overall population.”

Only the BioNTech-Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are now part of the covid-19 vaccination programme in Norway. On 11 March officials suspended the use of the AstraZeneca vaccine because of concerns about blood clots, and in April the Norwegian Institute of Public Health recommended no further use of that vaccine.3

Geir Bukholm, director of the Division of Infection Control and Environmental Health at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, said, “Since there are few people who die from covid-19 in Norway, the risk of dying after vaccination with the AstraZeneca vaccine would be higher than the risk of dying from the disease, particularly for younger people.” As of 25 May, Norway had recorded 782 deaths from covid-19.

The first large real-world study of how vaccines hold up against Omicron found that two shots of Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE’s Covid-19 vaccine lowered the risk of hospital admission by 70% for patients infected with the highly mutated variant.

The study, by South Africa’s largest private health insurer Discovery Ltd., found that while Omicron reduced vaccine effectiveness against infection to 33% from 80% for Delta, its effect on protection against hospitalization was less marked, falling to 70% from 93%.

While the study provides important clues about how vaccines hold up against Omicron, it is difficult to draw wide-ranging conclusions from South Africa, which has a much younger population than Europe and the U.S. and also has a different mix of immunity, with high levels of prior infection but a relatively low vaccination rate. For conclusions that may be more relevant for the U.S., health authorities will look closely at the U.K., whose demographic profile and vaccination rates are more like the U.S. and where the variant is already well established.

It comes as many governments rush to roll out booster shots more widely in the hope that—as early studies have suggested—a further shot will shore up protection against Omicron.

“It’s very heartening to see this result and that we still have vaccine effectiveness [against hospital admission] that is still greater than 50%,” said Glenda Gray, president and chief executive officer of the South African Medical Research Council, which collaborated with Discovery.

The study examined 211,610 Covid-19 test results in adults reported since the beginning of September. It used that data to compare vaccine effectiveness during September and October, when Delta was dominant, with the three-week period between Nov. 15 and Dec. 7, when Omicron took hold. Discovery Health insures around 3.7 million people in South Africa.

The study—the largest to provide clues about how the vaccines hold up against Omicron in the real world—suggests that although the new strain can easily infect people who have been fully vaccinated, it is still much less likely to cause serious illness when it does. The research hasn’t yet been published or peer-reviewed in a scientific journal and scientists not involved in the research said the conclusions could change as more data emerges.

The Omicron variant was first identified by scientists in South Africa around three weeks ago and has driven a sharp rise in cases there. It has now been detected in 77 countries across the world, according to the World Health Organization. On Friday, scientists estimated Omicron’s R number in South Africa—a measure of how many people the average infected person goes on to infect—stood at 2.5, higher than any earlier variant.

New daily cases averaged 20,488 for the week ending Dec. 13, nearly double the week before. On Monday, in an indication that a large number of infections are being missed, health authorities said 31% of tests had registered a positive result.

The findings build on earlier, laboratory-based research from various groups around the world examining how well the blood of vaccinated people neutralizes the Omicron variant. Those studies found that antibodies in the blood of people who had received two doses of vaccine were much weaker against Omicron than earlier strains.

Last week, Pfizer executives predicted that the vaccines would hold up better against severe disease because the immune cells that fight the virus once it takes hold could still recognize most parts of Omicron’s spike protein, which the virus uses to enter cells.

Neutralizing antibodies act as the body’s first line of defense, aiming to prevent infection by stopping the virus from entering cells. Other parts of the immune system, such as T-cells, come into play to prevent serious illness once infection takes hold.

The Discovery study also found that protection against infection from Omicron appeared to wane over time in vaccinated people. People who had received their second dose in the two to four weeks before the Omicron period were 56% protected against infection with the new strain. That protection fell to 25% for people who had received their second dose three to four months earlier. In the study, infection referred to a positive PCR test result, so is likely to reflect symptomatic disease, the researchers said.

Protection against severe disease appeared to decline with age, but the researchers cautioned that the data was uncertain and could be complicated by a larger waning effect in older groups, who would have received their shots earlier. The researchers also found that Omicron eroded the protective effect of prior infection.

The study couldn’t examine the real-world effect of a third shot because South Africa only recently approved boosters, and hasn’t yet started rolling them out. But the researchers said it was likely that a booster would strengthen protection against infection. Pfizer and BioNTech last week said a third dose restored antibodies to a level where they could block the Omicron variant in lab tests.

“The vaccines were designed to protect against hospitalization and death,” said Shirley Collie, chief health analytics actuary at Discovery Health. “These breakthrough infections we do expect to see. This is something a boosting strategy would mitigate.”

Separately, the study found that, adjusting for various factors, including age, adults infected with the Omicron variant were 29% less likely to need hospitalization than during the country’s first wave, which was dominated by a strain known as D614G. It also found that, among those who were admitted to hospital, the disease appeared to be less serious, with 5% of hospitalized patients needing intensive care, versus 22% during the Delta wave.

The researchers said they couldn’t determine whether Omicron is inherently less virulent than earlier strains, or whether the lower rate of hospitalization resulted from a high level of immunity in the population from either prior infection or vaccination.

Officials from the World Health Organization on Tuesday also cautioned against premature conclusions that Omicron causes milder disease. And even if it does prove to be a milder variant, the sheer number of cases could lead to a surge in hospitalizations and overwhelm health systems.

“A more transmissible virus can do just as much damage or even more than one that is more severe but less transmissible,” said Bruce Aylward, a senior adviser to WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “We need to see this over time.”

The South African study also found that children have a 20% higher risk of being admitted to hospital with the virus compared with the first wave, but researchers said the figure may just reflect a higher infection rate among children being admitted for non-Covid care, because hospitals routinely test all admissions.



